*roject *utenberg’s *l*ce’s *dventures *n *onder****, by *ew** *arroll

Th** e*ook ** for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and w*th
almost no restr*ct*ons whatsoever.  *ou may copy *t, g*ve *t away or
re-use *t under the terms of the *roject *utenberg *icense *ncluded
w*th th** e*ook or onl*ne at www.gutenberg.org


T*tle: *l*ce’s *dventures *n *onder****

*uthor: *ew** *arroll

*ost*ng *ate: *une 25, 2008 [*Book #11]
*elease *ate: *arch, 1994
*ast *pdated: *ctober 6, 2016

*anguage: *ngl**h

*haracter set encod*ng: **F-8

*** ***** ** **** ******* ***E*B*** *B*** **I*E’* *********S ** ********** ***










**I*E’* *********S ** **********

*ew** *arroll

*** ********** ******* ******* 3.0




******* *. *own the *abb*t-*ole

*l*ce was beg*nn*ng to get very t*red of s*tt*ng by her s**ter on the
bank, and of hav*ng noth*ng to do: once or tw*ce she had peeped *nto the
book her s**ter was read*ng, but *t had no p*ctures or conversat*ons *n
*t, ‘and what ** the use of a book,’ thought *l*ce ‘w*thout p*ctures or
conversat*ons?’

*o she was cons*der*ng *n her own m*nd (as well as she could, for the
hot day made her feel very sleepy and stup*d), whether the pleasure
of mak*ng a da**y-cha*n would be worth the trouble of gett*ng up and
p*ck*ng the da**ies, when suddenly a *h*te *abb*t w*th p*nk eyes ran
close by her.

There was noth*ng so **** remarkable *n ****; nor d*d *l*ce th*nk *t so
**** much out of the way to hear the *abb*t say to *tself, ‘*h dear!
*h dear! * shall be late!’ (when she thought *t over afterwards, *t
occurred to her **** she ought to have wondered at th**, but at the t*me
*t all seemed qu*te natural); but when the *abb*t actually **** * *****
*** ** *** *********-******, and looked at *t, and then hurr*ed on,
*l*ce started to her feet, for *t flashed across her m*nd **** she had
never before seen a rabb*t w*th e*ther a wa**tcoat-pocket, or a watch
to take out of *t, and burn*ng w*th cur*os*ty, she ran across the f*eld
after *t, and fortunately was just *n t*me to see *t pop down a large
rabb*t-hole under the hedge.

*n another moment down went *l*ce after *t, never once cons*der*ng how
*n the world she was to get out aga*n.

The rabb*t-hole went stra*ght on l*ke a tunnel for some way, and then
d*pped suddenly down, so suddenly **** *l*ce had not a moment to th*nk
about stopp*ng herself before she found herself fall*ng down a very deep
well.

*ither the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she had
plenty of t*me as she went down to look about her and to wonder what was
***** to happen next. *irst, she tr*ed to look down and make out what
she was com*ng to, but *t was too dark to see anyth*ng; then she
looked at the s*des of the well, and not*ced **** they were f*lled w*th
cupboards and book-shelves; here and there she saw maps and p*ctures
hung upon pegs. *he took down a jar from one of the shelves as
she passed; *t was labelled ‘****** *********’, but to her great
d**appo*ntment *t was empty: she d*d not l*ke to drop the jar for fear
of k*ll*ng somebody, so ***aged to put *t *nto one of the cupboards as
she fell past *t.

‘*ell!’ thought *l*ce to herself, ‘after such a fall as th**, * shall
th*nk noth*ng of tumbl*ng down sta*rs! *ow brave they’ll all th*nk me at
home! *hy, * wouldn’t say anyth*ng about *t, even *f * fell off the top
of the house!’ (*h*ch was very l*kely true.)

*own, down, down. *ould the fall ***** come to an end! ‘* wonder how
***y m*les *’ve fallen by th** t*me?’ she sa*d aloud. ‘* must be gett*ng
somewhere near the centre of the earth. *et me see: **** would be four
thousand m*les down, * th*nk--’ (for, you see, *l*ce had learnt several
th*ngs of th** sort *n her lessons *n the schoolroom, and though th**
was not a **** good opportun*ty for show*ng off her knowledge, as there
was no one to l**ten to her, st*ll *t was good pract*ce to say *t over)
‘--yes, ****’s about the r*ght d**tance--but then * wonder what *at*tude
or *ong*tude *’ve got to?’ (*l*ce had no *dea what *at*tude was, or
*ong*tude e*ther, but thought they were n*ce grand ***** to say.)

*resently she began aga*n. ‘* wonder *f * shall fall r*ght ******* the
earth! *ow funny *t’ll seem to come out among the people **** walk w*th
the*r heads downward! The *nt*path*es, * th*nk--’ (she was rather glad
there *** no one l**ten*ng, th** t*me, as *t d*dn’t sound at all the
r*ght word) ‘--but * shall have to ask them what the name of the country
**, you know. *lease, *a’am, ** th** *ew *ea**** or *ustral*a?’ (and
she tr*ed to curtsey as she spoke--fancy ****S**I*G as you’re fall*ng
through the a*r! *o you th*nk you could ***age *t?) ‘*nd what an
*gnorant l*ttle g*rl she’ll th*nk me for ask*ng! *o, *t’ll never do to
ask: perhaps * shall see *t wr*tten up somewhere.’

*own, down, down. There was noth*ng else to do, so *l*ce soon began
talk*ng aga*n. ‘*inah’ll m**s me very much to-n*ght, * should th*nk!’
(*inah was the cat.) ‘* hope they’ll remember her saucer of m*lk at
tea-t*me. *inah my dear! * w**h you were down here w*th me! There are no
m*ce *n the a*r, *’m afra*d, but you m*ght catch a bat, and ****’s very
l*ke a mouse, you know. *ut do cats eat bats, * wonder?’ *nd here *l*ce
began to get rather sleepy, and went on say*ng to herself, *n a dreamy
sort of way, ‘*o cats eat bats? *o cats eat bats?’ and somet*mes, ‘*o
bats eat cats?’ for, you see, as she couldn’t answer e*ther quest*on,
*t d*dn’t much matter wh*ch way she put *t. *he felt **** she was doz*ng
off, and had just begun to dream **** she was walk*ng hand *n hand w*th
*inah, and say*ng to her very earnestly, ‘*ow, *inah, tell me the truth:
d*d you ever eat a bat?’ when suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon
a heap of st*cks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.

*l*ce was not a b*t hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet *n a moment:
she looked up, but *t was all dark overhead; before her was another
long passage, and the *h*te *abb*t was st*ll *n s*ght, hurry*ng down *t.
There was not a moment to be lost: away went *l*ce l*ke the w*nd, and
was just *n t*me to hear *t say, as *t turned a corner, ‘*h my ears
and wh**kers, how late *t’s gett*ng!’ *he was close beh*nd *t when she
turned the corner, but the *abb*t was no longer to be seen: she found
herself *n a long, low hall, wh*ch was l*t up by a row of lamps hang*ng
from the roof.

There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and when
*l*ce had been all the way down one s*de and up the other, try*ng every
door, she walked sadly down the m*ddle, wonder*ng how she was ever to
get out aga*n.

*uddenly she came upon a l*ttle three-legged table, all made of sol*d
glass; there was noth*ng on *t except a t*ny golden key, and *l*ce’s
f*rst thought was **** *t m*ght belong to one of the doors of the hall;
but, alas! e*ther the locks were too large, or the key was too small,
but at any rate *t would not open any of them. *owever, on the second
t*me round, she came upon a low curta*n she had not not*ced before, and
beh*nd *t was a l*ttle door about f*fteen *nches h*gh: she tr*ed the
l*ttle golden key *n the lock, and to her great del*ght *t f*tted!

*l*ce opened the door and found **** *t led *nto a small passage, not
much larger than a rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along the passage
*nto the lovel*est garden you ever saw. *ow she longed to get out of
**** dark hall, and wander about among those beds of br*ght flowers and
those cool founta*ns, but she could not even get her head through the
doorway; ‘and even *f my head would go through,’ thought poor *l*ce, ‘*t
would be of very l*ttle use w*thout my shoulders. *h, how * w**h * could
shut up l*ke a telescope! * th*nk * could, *f * only knew how to beg*n.’
*or, you see, so ***y out-of-the-way th*ngs had happened lately,
**** *l*ce had begun to th*nk **** very few th*ngs *ndeed were really
*mposs*ble.

There seemed to be no use *n wa*t*ng by the l*ttle door, so she went
back to the table, half hop*ng she m*ght f*nd another key on *t, or at
any rate a book of rules for shutt*ng people up l*ke telescopes: th**
t*me she found a l*ttle bottle on *t, [‘wh*ch certa*nly was not here
before,’ sa*d *l*ce,) and round the neck of the bottle was a paper
label, w*th the ***** ‘***** **’ beaut*fully pr*nted on *t *n large
******s.

*t was all very well to say ‘*r*nk me,’ but the w**e l*ttle *l*ce was
not ***** to do **** *n a hurry. ‘*o, *’ll look f*rst,’ she sa*d, ‘and
see whether *t’s marked “po**on” or not’; for she had read several n*ce
l*ttle h**tor*es about ch*ldren who had got burnt, and eaten up by w*ld
beasts and other unpleasant th*ngs, all because they ***** not remember
the s*mple rules the*r fr*ends had taught them: such as, **** a red-hot
poker w*ll burn you *f you hold *t too long; and **** *f you cut your
f*nger **** deeply w*th a kn*fe, *t usually bleeds; and she had never
forgotten ****, *f you dr*nk much from a bottle marked ‘po**on,’ *t **
almost certa*n to d**agree w*th you, sooner or later.

*owever, th** bottle was *** marked ‘po**on,’ so *l*ce ventured to taste
*t, and f*nd*ng *t very n*ce, (*t had, *n fact, a sort of m*xed flavour
of cherry-tart, custard, p*ne-apple, roast turkey, toffee, and hot
buttered toast,) she very soon f*n**hed *t off.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

‘*hat a cur*ous feel*ng!’ sa*d *l*ce; ‘* must be shutt*ng up l*ke a
telescope.’

*nd so *t was *ndeed: she was now only ten *nches h*gh, and her face
br*ghtened up at the thought **** she was now the r*ght s*ze for *****
through the l*ttle door *nto **** lovely garden. *irst, however, she
wa*ted for a few m*nutes to see *f she was ***** to shr*nk any further:
she felt a l*ttle nervous about th**; ‘for *t m*ght end, you know,’ sa*d
*l*ce to herself, ‘*n my ***** out altogether, l*ke a candle. * wonder
what * should be l*ke then?’ *nd she tr*ed to fancy what the flame of a
candle ** l*ke after the candle ** blown out, for she could not remember
ever hav*ng seen such a th*ng.

*fter a wh*le, f*nd*ng **** noth*ng more happened, she dec*ded on *****
*nto the garden at once; but, alas for poor *l*ce! when she got to the
door, she found she had forgotten the l*ttle golden key, and when she
went back to the table for *t, she found she could not poss*bly reach
*t: she could see *t qu*te pla*nly through the glass, and she tr*ed her
best to cl*mb up one of the legs of the table, but *t was too sl*ppery;
and when she had t*red herself out w*th try*ng, the poor l*ttle th*ng
sat down and cr*ed.

‘*ome, there’s no use *n cry*ng l*ke ****!’ sa*d *l*ce to herself,
rather sharply; ‘* adv**e you to leave off th** m*nute!’ *he generally
gave herself very good adv*ce, (though she very seldom followed *t),
and somet*mes she scolded herself so severely as to br*ng tears *nto
her eyes; and once she remembered try*ng to box her own ears for hav*ng
cheated herself *n a game of croquet she was play*ng aga*nst herself,
for th** cur*ous ch*ld was very fond of pretend*ng to be two people.
‘*ut *t’s no use now,’ thought poor *l*ce, ‘to pretend to be two people!
*hy, there’s hardly enough of me left to make *** respectable person!’

*oon her eye fell on a l*ttle glass box **** was ly*ng under the table:
she opened *t, and found *n *t a very small cake, on wh*ch the *****
‘*** **’ were beaut*fully marked *n currants. ‘*ell, *’ll eat *t,’ sa*d
*l*ce, ‘and *f *t makes me grow larger, * can reach the key; and *f *t
makes me grow smaller, * can creep under the door; so e*ther way *’ll
get *nto the garden, and * don’t care wh*ch happens!’

*he ate a l*ttle b*t, and sa*d anx*ously to herself, ‘*h*ch way? *h*ch
way?’, hold*ng her hand on the top of her head to feel wh*ch way *t was
grow*ng, and she was qu*te surpr**ed to f*nd **** she rema*ned the same
s*ze: to be sure, th** generally happens when one eats cake, but *l*ce
had got so much *nto the way of expect*ng noth*ng but out-of-the-way
th*ngs to happen, **** *t seemed qu*te dull and stup*d for l*fe to go on
*n the common way.

*o she set to work, and very soon f*n**hed off the cake.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *




******* *I. The *ool of Tears

‘*ur*ouser and cur*ouser!’ cr*ed *l*ce (she was so much surpr**ed, ****
for the moment she qu*te forgot how to speak good *ngl**h); ‘now *’m
open*ng out l*ke the largest telescope **** ever was! *ood-bye, feet!’
(for when she looked down at her feet, they seemed to be almost out of
s*ght, they were gett*ng so far off). ‘*h, my poor l*ttle feet, * wonder
who w*ll put on your shoes and stock*ngs for you now, dears? *’m sure
_*_ shan’t be able! * shall be a great deal too far off to trouble
myself about you: you must ***age the best way you can;--but * must be
k*nd to them,’ thought *l*ce, ‘or perhaps they won’t walk the way * want
to go! *et me see: *’ll g*ve them a new pa*r of boots every *hr**tmas.’

*nd she went on plann*ng to herself how she would ***age *t. ‘They must
go by the carr*er,’ she thought; ‘and how funny *t’ll seem, send*ng
presents to one’s own feet! *nd how odd the d*rect*ons w*ll look!

     **I*E’* ***** ****, *S*.
       ******R*G,
         **** *** ******,
           (**** **I*E’* ****).

*h dear, what nonsense *’m talk*ng!’

*ust then her head struck aga*nst the roof of the hall: *n fact she was
now more than n*ne feet h*gh, and she at once took up the l*ttle golden
key and hurr*ed off to the garden door.

*oor *l*ce! *t was as much as she could do, ly*ng down on one s*de, to
look through *nto the garden w*th one eye; but to get through was more
hopeless than ever: she sat down and began to cry aga*n.

‘*ou ought to be ashamed of yourself,’ sa*d *l*ce, ‘a great g*rl l*ke
you,’ (she m*ght well say th**), ‘to go on cry*ng *n th** way! *top th**
moment, * tell you!’ *ut she went on all the same, shedd*ng gallons of
tears, unt*l there was a large pool all round her, about four *nches
deep and reach*ng half down the hall.

*fter a t*me she heard a l*ttle patter*ng of feet *n the d**tance, and
she hast*ly dr*ed her eyes to see what was com*ng. *t was the *h*te
*abb*t return*ng, splend*dly dressed, w*th a pa*r of wh*te k*d gloves *n
one hand and a large fan *n the other: he came trott*ng along *n a great
hurry, mutter*ng to h*mself as he came, ‘*h! the *uchess, the *uchess!
*h! won’t she be savage *f *’ve kept her wa*t*ng!’ *l*ce felt so
desperate **** she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the *abb*t
came near her, she began, *n a low, t*m*d vo*ce, ‘*f you please, s*r--’
The *abb*t started v*olently, dropped the wh*te k*d gloves and the fan,
and skurr*ed away *nto the darkness as hard as he could go.

*l*ce took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very hot, she
kept fann*ng herself all the t*me she went on talk*ng: ‘*ear, dear! *ow
queer everyth*ng ** to-day! *nd yesterday th*ngs went on just as usual.
* wonder *f *’ve been changed *n the n*ght? *et me th*nk: was * the
same when * got up th** morn*ng? * almost th*nk * can remember feel*ng a
l*ttle d*fferent. *ut *f *’m not the same, the next quest*on **, *ho
*n the world am *? *h, ****’* the great puzzle!’ *nd she began th*nk*ng
over all the ch*ldren she knew **** were of the same age as herself, to
see *f she could have been changed for any of them.

‘*’m sure *’m not *da,’ she sa*d, ‘for her ha*r goes *n such long
r*nglets, and m*ne doesn’t go *n r*nglets at all; and *’m sure * can’t
be *abel, for * know all sorts of th*ngs, and she, oh! she knows such a
very l*ttle! *es*des, ***’* she, and *’m *, and--oh dear, how puzzl*ng
*t all **! *’ll try *f * know all the th*ngs * used to know. *et me
see: four t*mes f*ve ** twelve, and four t*mes s*x ** th*rteen, and
four t*mes seven **--oh dear! * shall never get to twenty at **** rate!
*owever, the *ult*pl*cat*on Table doesn’t ****ify: let’s try *eography.
*ondon ** the cap*tal of *ar**, and *ar** ** the cap*tal of *ome, and
*ome--no, ****’* all wrong, *’m certa*n! * must have been changed for
*abel! *’ll try and say “*ow doth the l*ttle--“’ and she crossed her
hands on her lap as *f she were say*ng lessons, and began to repeat *t,
but her vo*ce sounded hoarse and strange, and the ***** d*d not come the
same as they used to do:--

     ‘*ow doth the l*ttle crocod*le
      *mprove h** sh*n*ng ta*l,
     *nd pour the waters of the *ile
      *n every golden scale!

     ‘*ow cheerfully he seems to gr*n,
      *ow neatly spread h** claws,
     *nd welcome l*ttle f**hes *n
      *ith gently sm*l*ng jaws!’

‘*’m sure those are not the r*ght *****,’ sa*d poor *l*ce, and her eyes
f*lled w*th tears aga*n as she went on, ‘* must be *abel after all, and
* shall have to go and l*ve *n **** poky l*ttle house, and have next to
no toys to play w*th, and oh! ever so ***y lessons to learn! *o, *’ve
made up my m*nd about *t; *f *’m *abel, *’ll stay down here! *t’ll be no
use the*r putt*ng the*r heads down and say*ng “*ome up aga*n, dear!” *
shall only look up and say “*ho am * then? Tell me **** f*rst, and then,
*f * l*ke be*ng **** person, *’ll come up: *f not, *’ll stay down here
t*ll *’m somebody else”--but, oh dear!’ cr*ed *l*ce, w*th a sudden burst
of tears, ‘* do w**h they ***** put the*r heads down! * am so **** t*red
of be*ng all alone here!’

*s she sa*d th** she looked down at her hands, and was surpr**ed to see
**** she had put on one of the *abb*t’s l*ttle wh*te k*d gloves wh*le
she was talk*ng. ‘*ow *** * have done ****?’ she thought. ‘* must
be grow*ng small aga*n.’ *he got up and went to the table to measure
herself by *t, and found ****, as nearly as she could guess, she was now
about two feet h*gh, and was ***** on shr*nk*ng rap*dly: she soon found
out **** the cause of th** was the fan she was hold*ng, and she dropped
*t hast*ly, just *n t*me to avo*d shr*nk*ng away altogether.

‘That *** a narrow escape!’ sa*d *l*ce, a good deal fr*ghtened at the
sudden change, but very glad to f*nd herself st*ll *n ex**tence; ‘and
now for the garden!’ and she ran w*th all speed back to the l*ttle door:
but, alas! the l*ttle door was shut aga*n, and the l*ttle golden key was
ly*ng on the glass table as before, ‘and th*ngs are worse than ever,’
thought the poor ch*ld, ‘for * never was so small as th** before, never!
*nd * declare *t’s too bad, **** *t **!’

*s she sa*d these ***** her foot sl*pped, and *n another moment, splash!
she was up to her ch*n *n salt water. *er f*rst *dea was **** she
had somehow fallen *nto the sea, ‘and *n **** case * can go back by
ra*lway,’ she sa*d to herself. (*l*ce had been to the seas*de once *n
her l*fe, and had come to the general conclus*on, **** wherever you go
to on the *ngl**h coast you f*nd a number of bath*ng mach*nes *n the
sea, some ch*ldren d*gg*ng *n the sand w*th wooden spades, then a row
of lodg*ng houses, and beh*nd them a ra*lway stat*on.) *owever, she soon
made out **** she was *n the pool of tears wh*ch she had wept when she
was n*ne feet h*gh.

‘* w**h * hadn’t cr*ed so much!’ sa*d *l*ce, as she swam about, try*ng
to f*nd her way out. ‘* shall be pun**hed for *t now, * suppose, by
be*ng drowned *n my own tears! That **** be a queer th*ng, to be sure!
*owever, everyth*ng ** queer to-day.’

*ust then she heard someth*ng splash*ng about *n the pool a l*ttle way
off, and she swam nearer to make out what *t was: at f*rst she thought
*t must be a walrus or h*ppopotamus, but then she remembered how small
she was now, and she soon made out **** *t was only a mouse **** had
sl*pped *n l*ke herself.

‘*ould *t be of any use, now,’ thought *l*ce, ‘to speak to th** mouse?
*veryth*ng ** so out-of-the-way down here, **** * should th*nk very
l*kely *t can talk: at any rate, there’s no harm *n try*ng.’ *o she
began: ‘* *ouse, do you know the way out of th** pool? * am very t*red
of sw*mm*ng about here, * *ouse!’ (*l*ce thought th** must be the r*ght
way of speak*ng to a mouse: she had never done such a th*ng before, but
she remembered hav*ng seen *n her brother’s *at*n *rammar, ‘* mouse--of
a mouse--to a mouse--a mouse--* mouse!’) The *ouse looked at her rather
*nqu**it*vely, and seemed to her to w*nk w*th one of *ts l*ttle eyes,
but *t sa*d noth*ng.

‘*erhaps *t doesn’t understand *ngl**h,’ thought *l*ce; ‘* daresay *t’s
a *rench mouse, come over w*th *ill*am the ***queror.’ (*or, w*th all
her knowledge of h**tory, *l*ce had no very clear not*on how long ago
anyth*ng had happened.) *o she began aga*n: ‘*u est ma chatte?’ wh*ch
was the f*rst sentence *n her *rench lesson-book. The *ouse gave a
sudden leap out of the water, and seemed to qu*ver all over w*th fr*ght.
‘*h, * beg your pardon!’ cr*ed *l*ce hast*ly, afra*d **** she had hurt
the poor an*mal’s feel*ngs. ‘* qu*te forgot you d*dn’t l*ke cats.’

‘*ot l*ke cats!’ cr*ed the *ouse, *n a shr*ll, pass*onate vo*ce. ‘*ould
*** l*ke cats *f you were me?’

‘*ell, perhaps not,’ sa*d *l*ce *n a sooth*ng tone: ‘don’t be angry
about *t. *nd yet * w**h * could show you our cat *inah: * th*nk you’d
take a fancy to cats *f you could only see her. *he ** such a dear qu*et
th*ng,’ *l*ce went on, half to herself, as she swam laz*ly about *n the
pool, ‘and she s*ts purr*ng so n*cely by the f*re, l*ck*ng her paws and
wash*ng her face--and she ** such a n*ce soft th*ng to nurse--and she’s
such a cap*tal one for catch*ng m*ce--oh, * beg your pardon!’ cr*ed
*l*ce aga*n, for th** t*me the *ouse was br**tl*ng all over, and she
felt certa*n *t must be really offended. ‘*e won’t talk about her any
more *f you’d rather not.’

‘*e *ndeed!’ cr*ed the *ouse, who was trembl*ng down to the end of h**
ta*l. ‘*s *f * would talk on such a subject! *ur fam*ly always ****D
cats: nasty, low, vulgar th*ngs! *on’t let me hear the name aga*n!’

‘* won’t *ndeed!’ sa*d *l*ce, *n a great hurry to change the subject of
conversat*on. ‘*re you--are you fond--of--of dogs?’ The *ouse d*d not
answer, so *l*ce went on eagerly: ‘There ** such a n*ce l*ttle dog near
our house * should l*ke to show you! * l*ttle br*ght-eyed terr*er, you
know, w*th oh, such long curly brown ha*r! *nd *t’ll fetch th*ngs when
you throw them, and *t’ll s*t up and beg for *ts d*nner, and all sorts
of th*ngs--* can’t remember half of them--and *t belongs to a farmer,
you know, and he says *t’s so useful, *t’s worth a hundred pounds! *e
says *t k*lls all the rats and--oh dear!’ cr*ed *l*ce *n a sorrowful
tone, ‘*’m afra*d *’ve offended *t aga*n!’ *or the *ouse was sw*mm*ng
away from her as hard as *t could go, and mak*ng qu*te a commot*on *n
the pool as *t went.

*o she called softly after *t, ‘*ouse dear! *o come back aga*n, and we
won’t talk about cats or dogs e*ther, *f you don’t l*ke them!’ *hen the
*ouse heard th**, *t turned round and swam slowly back to her: *ts
face was qu*te pale (w*th pass*on, *l*ce thought), and *t sa*d *n a low
trembl*ng vo*ce, ‘*et us get to the shore, and then *’ll tell you my
h**tory, and you’ll understand why *t ** * hate cats and dogs.’

*t was h*gh t*me to go, for the pool was gett*ng qu*te crowded w*th the
***** and an*mals **** had fallen *nto *t: there were a *uck and a *odo,
a *ory and an *aglet, and several other cur*ous creatures. *l*ce led the
way, and the whole party swam to the shore.




******* *I*. * *aucus-*ace and a *ong Tale

They were *ndeed a queer-look*ng party **** assembled on the bank--the
***** w*th draggled feathers, the an*mals w*th the*r fur cl*ng*ng close
to them, and all dr*pp*ng wet, cross, and uncomfortable.

The f*rst quest*on of course was, how to get dry aga*n: they had a
consultat*on about th**, and after a few m*nutes *t seemed qu*te natural
to *l*ce to f*nd herself talk*ng fam*l*arly w*th them, as *f she had
known them all her l*fe. *ndeed, she had qu*te a long argument w*th the
*ory, who at last turned sulky, and would only say, ‘* am older than
you, and must know better’; and th** *l*ce would not allow w*thout
know*ng how old *t was, and, as the *ory pos*t*vely refused to tell *ts
age, there was no more to be sa*d.

*t last the *ouse, who seemed to be a person of author*ty among them,
called out, ‘*it down, all of you, and l**ten to me! *’*L soon make you
dry enough!’ They all sat down at once, *n a large r*ng, w*th the *ouse
*n the m*ddle. *l*ce kept her eyes anx*ously f*xed on *t, for she felt
sure she would catch a bad cold *f she d*d not get dry very soon.

‘*hem!’ sa*d the *ouse w*th an *mportant a*r, ‘are you all ready? Th**
** the dr*est th*ng * know. *ilence all round, *f you please! “*ill*am
the ***queror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was soon subm*tted
to by the *ngl**h, who wanted leaders, and had been of late much
accustomed to usurpat*on and conquest. *dw*n and *orcar, the earls of
*erc*a and *orthumbr*a--“’

‘*gh!’ sa*d the *ory, w*th a sh*ver.

‘* beg your pardon!’ sa*d the *ouse, frown*ng, but very pol*tely: ‘*id
you speak?’

‘*ot *!’ sa*d the *ory hast*ly.

‘* thought you d*d,’ sa*d the *ouse. ‘--* proceed. “*dw*n and *orcar,
the earls of *erc*a and *orthumbr*a, declared for h*m: and even *t*gand,
the patr*ot*c archb**hop of *anterbury, found *t adv**able--“’

‘*ound ****?’ sa*d the *uck.

‘*ound **,’ the *ouse repl*ed rather crossly: ‘of course you know what
“*t” means.’

‘* know what “*t” means well enough, when * f*nd a th*ng,’ sa*d the
*uck: ‘*t’s generally a frog or a worm. The quest*on **, what d*d the
archb**hop f*nd?’

The *ouse d*d not not*ce th** quest*on, but hurr*edly went on, ‘“--found
*t adv**able to go w*th *dgar *thel*ng to **** *ill*am and offer h*m the
crown. *ill*am’s conduct at f*rst was moderate. *ut the *nsolence of h**
*or***s--” *ow are you gett*ng on now, my dear?’ *t cont*nued, turn*ng
to *l*ce as *t spoke.

‘*s wet as ever,’ sa*d *l*ce *n a melancholy tone: ‘*t doesn’t seem to
dry me at all.’

‘*n **** case,’ sa*d the *odo solemnly, r**ing to *ts feet, ‘* move
**** the ****ing adjourn, for the *mmed*ate adopt*on of more energet*c
remed*es--’

‘*peak *ngl**h!’ sa*d the *aglet. ‘* don’t know the mean*ng of half
those long *****, and, what’s more, * don’t bel*eve you do e*ther!’ *nd
the *aglet bent down *ts head to h*de a sm*le: some of the other *****
t*ttered aud*bly.

‘*hat * was ***** to say,’ sa*d the *odo *n an offended tone, ‘was, ****
the best th*ng to get us dry would be a *aucus-race.’

‘*hat ** a *aucus-race?’ sa*d *l*ce; not **** she wanted much to know,
but the *odo had paused as *f *t thought **** ******** ought to speak,
and no one else seemed *ncl*ned to say anyth*ng.

‘*hy,’ sa*d the *odo, ‘the best way to expla*n *t ** to do *t.’ (*nd, as
you m*ght l*ke to try the th*ng yourself, some w*nter day, * w*ll tell
you how the *odo ***aged *t.)

*irst *t marked out a race-course, *n a sort of c*rcle, [‘the exact
shape doesn’t matter,’ *t sa*d,) and then all the party were placed
along the course, here and there. There was no ‘*ne, two, three, and
away,’ but they began runn*ng when they l*ked, and left off when they
l*ked, so **** *t was not easy to know when the race was over. *owever,
when they had been runn*ng half an hour or so, and were qu*te dry aga*n,
the *odo suddenly called out ‘The race ** over!’ and they all crowded
round *t, pant*ng, and ask*ng, ‘*ut who has won?’

Th** quest*on the *odo could not answer w*thout a great deal of thought,
and *t sat for a long t*me w*th one f*nger pressed upon *ts forehead
(the pos*t*on *n wh*ch you usually see *hakespeare, *n the p*ctures
of h*m), wh*le the rest wa*ted *n s*lence. *t last the *odo sa*d,
‘********* has won, and all must have pr*zes.’

‘*ut who ** to g*ve the pr*zes?’ qu*te a chorus of vo*ces asked.

‘*hy, ***, of course,’ sa*d the *odo, po*nt*ng to *l*ce w*th one f*nger;
and the whole party at once crowded round her, call*ng out *n a confused
way, ‘*r*zes! *r*zes!’

*l*ce had no *dea what to do, and *n despa*r she put her hand *n her
pocket, and pulled out a box of comf*ts, (luck*ly the salt water had
not got *nto *t), and handed them round as pr*zes. There was exactly one
a-p*ece all round.

‘*ut she must have a pr*ze herself, you know,’ sa*d the *ouse.

‘*f course,’ the *odo repl*ed very gravely. ‘*hat else have you got *n
your pocket?’ he went on, turn*ng to *l*ce.

‘*nly a th*mble,’ sa*d *l*ce sadly.

‘*and *t over here,’ sa*d the *odo.

Then they all crowded round her once more, wh*le the *odo solemnly
presented the th*mble, say*ng ‘*e beg your acceptance of th** elegant
th*mble’; and, when *t had f*n**hed th** short speech, they all cheered.

*l*ce thought the whole th*ng very absurd, but they all looked so grave
**** she d*d not dare to laugh; and, as she could not th*nk of anyth*ng
to say, she s*mply bowed, and took the th*mble, look*ng as solemn as she
could.

The next th*ng was to eat the comf*ts: th** caused some no**e and
confus*on, as the large ***** compla*ned **** they could not taste
the*rs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on the back.
*owever, *t was over at last, and they sat down aga*n *n a r*ng, and
begged the *ouse to tell them someth*ng more.

‘*ou prom**ed to tell me your h**tory, you know,’ sa*d *l*ce, ‘and why
*t ** you hate--* and *,’ she added *n a wh**per, half afra*d **** *t
would be offended aga*n.

‘*ine ** a long and a sad tale!’ sa*d the *ouse, turn*ng to *l*ce, and
s*gh*ng.

‘*t ** a long ta*l, certa*nly,’ sa*d *l*ce, look*ng down w*th wonder at
the *ouse’s ta*l; ‘but why do you call *t sad?’ *nd she kept on puzzl*ng
about *t wh*le the *ouse was speak*ng, so **** her *dea of the tale was
someth*ng l*ke th**:--

         ‘*ury sa*d to a
         mouse, That he
        met *n the
       house,
     “*et us
      both go to
       law: * w*ll
        prosecute
         ***.--*ome,
           *’ll take no
           den*al; *e
          must have a
        tr*al: *or
      really th**
     morn*ng *’ve
    noth*ng
    to do.”
      *a*d the
      mouse to the
       cur, “*uch
        a tr*al,
         dear *ir,
            *ith
          no jury
        or judge,
       would be
      wast*ng
      our
      breath.”
        “*’ll be
        judge, *’ll
         be jury,”
             *a*d
         cunn*ng
          old *ury:
          “*’ll
          try the
            whole
            cause,
              and
           condemn
           you
          to
           death.”’


‘*ou are not attend*ng!’ sa*d the *ouse to *l*ce severely. ‘*hat are you
th*nk*ng of?’

‘* beg your pardon,’ sa*d *l*ce very humbly: ‘you had got to the f*fth
bend, * th*nk?’

‘* had ***!’ cr*ed the *ouse, sharply and very angr*ly.

‘* knot!’ sa*d *l*ce, always ready to make herself useful, and look*ng
anx*ously about her. ‘*h, do let me help to undo *t!’

‘* shall do noth*ng of the sort,’ sa*d the *ouse, gett*ng up and walk*ng
away. ‘*ou *nsult me by talk*ng such nonsense!’

‘* d*dn’t mean *t!’ pleaded poor *l*ce. ‘*ut you’re so eas*ly offended,
you know!’

The *ouse only growled *n reply.

‘*lease come back and f*n**h your story!’ *l*ce called after *t; and the
others all jo*ned *n chorus, ‘*es, please do!’ but the *ouse only shook
*ts head *mpat*ently, and walked a l*ttle qu*cker.

‘*hat a p*ty *t wouldn’t stay!’ s*ghed the *ory, as soon as *t was qu*te
out of s*ght; and an old *rab took the opportun*ty of say*ng to her
daughter ‘*h, my dear! *et th** be a lesson to you never to lose
**** temper!’ ‘*old your tongue, *a!’ sa*d the young *rab, a l*ttle
snapp**hly. ‘*ou’re enough to try the pat*ence of an oyster!’

‘* w**h * had our *inah here, * know * do!’ sa*d *l*ce aloud, address*ng
nobody *n part*cular. ‘*he’d soon fetch *t back!’

‘*nd who ** *inah, *f * m*ght venture to ask the quest*on?’ sa*d the
*ory.

*l*ce repl*ed eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about her pet:
‘*inah’s our cat. *nd she’s such a cap*tal one for catch*ng m*ce you
can’t th*nk! *nd oh, * w**h you could see her after the *****! *hy,
she’ll eat a l*ttle b*rd as soon as look at *t!’

Th** speech caused a remarkable sensat*on among the party. *ome of the
***** hurr*ed off at once: one old *agp*e began wrapp*ng *tself up very
carefully, remark*ng, ‘* really must be gett*ng home; the n*ght-a*r
doesn’t su*t my throat!’ and a *anary called out *n a trembl*ng vo*ce to
*ts ch*ldren, ‘*ome away, my dears! *t’s h*gh t*me you were all *n bed!’
*n var*ous pretexts they all moved off, and *l*ce was soon left alone.

‘* w**h * hadn’t ment*oned *inah!’ she sa*d to herself *n a melancholy
tone. ‘*obody seems to l*ke her, down here, and *’m sure she’s the best
cat *n the world! *h, my dear *inah! * wonder *f * shall ever see you
any more!’ *nd here poor *l*ce began to cry aga*n, for she felt very
lonely and low-sp*r*ted. *n a l*ttle wh*le, however, she aga*n heard
a l*ttle patter*ng of footsteps *n the d**tance, and she looked up
eagerly, half hop*ng **** the *ouse had changed h** m*nd, and was com*ng
back to f*n**h h** story.




******* *V. The *abb*t *ends *n a ***tle *ill

*t was the *h*te *abb*t, trott*ng slowly back aga*n, and look*ng
anx*ously about as *t went, as *f *t had lost someth*ng; and she heard
*t mutter*ng to *tself ‘The *uchess! The *uchess! *h my dear paws! *h
my fur and wh**kers! *he’ll get me executed, as sure as ferrets are
ferrets! *here *** * have dropped them, * wonder?’ *l*ce guessed *n a
moment **** *t was look*ng for the fan and the pa*r of wh*te k*d gloves,
and she very good-naturedly began hunt*ng about for them, but they were
nowhere to be seen--everyth*ng seemed to have changed s*nce her sw*m *n
the pool, and the great hall, w*th the glass table and the l*ttle door,
had van**hed completely.

*ery soon the *abb*t not*ced *l*ce, as she went hunt*ng about, and
called out to her *n an angry tone, ‘*hy, *ary *nn, what *** you do*ng
out here? *un home th** moment, and fetch me a pa*r of gloves and a fan!
*u*ck, now!’ *nd *l*ce was so much fr*ghtened **** she ran off at once
*n the d*rect*on *t po*nted to, w*thout try*ng to expla*n the m**take *t
had made.

‘*e took me for h** housema*d,’ she sa*d to herself as she ran. ‘*ow
surpr**ed he’ll be when he f*nds out who * am! *ut *’d better take h*m
h** fan and gloves--**** **, *f * can f*nd them.’ *s she sa*d th**, she
came upon a neat l*ttle house, on the door of wh*ch was a br*ght brass
plate w*th the name ‘*. *****T’ engraved upon *t. *he went *n w*thout
knock*ng, and hurr*ed upsta*rs, *n great fear lest she should **** the
real *ary *nn, and be turned out of the house before she had found the
fan and gloves.

‘*ow queer *t seems,’ *l*ce sa*d to herself, ‘to be ***** messages for
a rabb*t! * suppose *inah’ll be send*ng me on messages next!’ *nd she
began fancy*ng the sort of th*ng **** would happen: ‘“*iss *l*ce! *ome
here d*rectly, and get ready for your walk!” “*om*ng *n a m*nute,
nurse! *ut *’ve got to see **** the mouse doesn’t get out.” *nly * don’t
th*nk,’ *l*ce went on, ‘**** they’d let *inah stop *n the house *f *t
began order*ng people about l*ke ****!’

*y th** t*me she had found her way *nto a t*dy l*ttle room w*th a table
*n the w*ndow, and on *t (as she had hoped) a fan and two or three pa*rs
of t*ny wh*te k*d gloves: she took up the fan and a pa*r of the gloves,
and was just ***** to leave the room, when her eye fell upon a l*ttle
bottle **** stood near the look*ng-glass. There was no label th** t*me
w*th the ***** ‘***** **,’ but nevertheless she uncorked *t and put *t
to her l*ps. ‘* know ********* *nterest*ng ** sure to happen,’ she sa*d
to herself, ‘whenever * eat or dr*nk anyth*ng; so *’ll just see what
th** bottle does. * do hope *t’ll make me grow large aga*n, for really
*’m qu*te t*red of be*ng such a t*ny l*ttle th*ng!’

*t d*d so *ndeed, and much sooner than she had expected: before she had
drunk half the bottle, she found her head press*ng aga*nst the ce*l*ng,
and had to stoop to save her neck from be*ng broken. *he hast*ly put
down the bottle, say*ng to herself ‘That’s qu*te enough--* hope * shan’t
grow any more--*s *t **, * can’t get out at the door--* do w**h * hadn’t
drunk qu*te so much!’

*las! *t was too late to w**h ****! *he went on grow*ng, and grow*ng,
and very soon had to kneel down on the floor: *n another m*nute there
was not even room for th**, and she tr*ed the effect of ly*ng down w*th
one elbow aga*nst the door, and the other arm curled round her head.
*t*ll she went on grow*ng, and, as a last resource, she put one arm out
of the w*ndow, and one foot up the ch*mney, and sa*d to herself ‘*ow *
can do no more, whatever happens. *hat **** become of me?’

*uck*ly for *l*ce, the l*ttle mag*c bottle had now had *ts full effect,
and she grew no larger: st*ll *t was very uncomfortable, and, as there
seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever gett*ng out of the room
aga*n, no wonder she felt unhappy.

‘*t was much pleasanter at home,’ thought poor *l*ce, ‘when one wasn’t
always grow*ng larger and smaller, and be*ng ordered about by m*ce and
rabb*ts. * almost w**h * hadn’t gone down **** rabb*t-hole--and yet--and
yet--*t’s rather cur*ous, you know, th** sort of l*fe! * do wonder what
*** have happened to me! *hen * used to read fa*ry-tales, * fanc*ed ****
k*nd of th*ng never happened, and now here * am *n the m*ddle of one!
There ought to be a book wr*tten about me, **** there ought! *nd when *
grow up, *’ll wr*te one--but *’m grown up now,’ she added *n a sorrowful
tone; ‘at least there’s no room to grow up any more ****.’

‘*ut then,’ thought *l*ce, ‘shall * ***** get any older than * am
now? That’ll be a comfort, one way--never to be an old wo***--but
then--always to have lessons to learn! *h, * shouldn’t l*ke ****!’

‘*h, you fool**h *l*ce!’ she answered herself. ‘*ow can you learn
lessons *n here? *hy, there’s hardly room for ***, and no room at all
for any lesson-books!’

*nd so she went on, tak*ng f*rst one s*de and then the other, and mak*ng
qu*te a conversat*on of *t altogether; but after a few m*nutes she heard
a vo*ce outs*de, and stopped to l**ten.

‘*ary *nn! *ary *nn!’ sa*d the vo*ce. ‘*etch me my gloves th** moment!’
Then came a l*ttle patter*ng of feet on the sta*rs. *l*ce knew *t was
the *abb*t com*ng to look for her, and she trembled t*ll she shook the
house, qu*te forgett*ng **** she was now about a thousand t*mes as large
as the *abb*t, and had no reason to be afra*d of *t.

*resently the *abb*t came up to the door, and tr*ed to open *t; but, as
the door opened *nwards, and *l*ce’s elbow was pressed hard aga*nst *t,
**** attempt proved a fa*lure. *l*ce heard *t say to *tself ‘Then *’ll
go round and get *n at the w*ndow.’

‘**** you won’t’ thought *l*ce, and, after wa*t*ng t*ll she fanc*ed
she heard the *abb*t just under the w*ndow, she suddenly spread out her
hand, and made a snatch *n the a*r. *he d*d not get hold of anyth*ng,
but she heard a l*ttle shr*ek and a fall, and a crash of broken glass,
from wh*ch she concluded **** *t was just poss*ble *t had fallen *nto a
cucumber-frame, or someth*ng of the sort.

*ext came an angry vo*ce--the *abb*t’s--‘*at! *at! *here are you?’ *nd
then a vo*ce she had never heard before, ‘*ure then *’m here! *igg*ng
for apples, yer honour!’

‘*igg*ng for apples, *ndeed!’ sa*d the *abb*t angr*ly. ‘*ere! *ome and
help me out of ****!’ (*ounds of more broken glass.)

‘*ow tell me, *at, what’s **** *n the w*ndow?’

‘*ure, *t’s an arm, yer honour!’ (*e pronounced *t ‘arrum.’)

‘*n arm, you goose! *ho ever saw one **** s*ze? *hy, *t f*lls the whole
w*ndow!’

‘*ure, *t does, yer honour: but *t’s an arm for all ****.’

‘*ell, *t’s got no bus*ness there, at any rate: go and take *t away!’

There was a long s*lence after th**, and *l*ce could only hear wh**pers
now and then; such as, ‘*ure, * don’t l*ke *t, yer honour, at all, at
all!’ ‘*o as * tell you, you coward!’ and at last she spread out her
hand aga*n, and made another snatch *n the a*r. Th** t*me there were
*** l*ttle shr*eks, and more sounds of broken glass. ‘*hat a number of
cucumber-frames there must be!’ thought *l*ce. ‘* wonder what they’ll do
next! *s for pull*ng me out of the w*ndow, * only w**h they *****! *’m
sure * don’t want to stay *n here any longer!’

*he wa*ted for some t*me w*thout hear*ng anyth*ng more: at last came a
rumbl*ng of l*ttle cartwheels, and the sound of a good ***y vo*ces
all talk*ng together: she made out the *****: ‘*here’s the other
ladder?--*hy, * hadn’t to br*ng but one; *ill’s got the other--*ill!
fetch *t here, lad!--*ere, put ‘em up at th** corner--*o, t*e ‘em
together f*rst--they don’t reach half h*gh enough yet--*h! they’ll
do well enough; don’t be part*cular--*ere, *ill! catch hold of th**
rope--*ill the roof bear?--*ind **** loose slate--*h, *t’s com*ng
down! *eads below!’ (a loud crash)--‘*ow, who d*d ****?--*t was *ill, *
fancy--*ho’s to go down the ch*mney?--*ay, * shan’t! *** do *t!--That *
won’t, then!--*ill’s to go down--*ere, *ill! the master says you’re to
go down the ch*mney!’

‘*h! *o *ill’s got to come down the ch*mney, has he?’ sa*d *l*ce to
herself. ‘*hy, they seem to put everyth*ng upon *ill! * wouldn’t be *n
*ill’s place for a good deal: th** f*replace ** narrow, to be sure; but
* ***** * can k*ck a l*ttle!’

*he drew her foot as far down the ch*mney as she could, and wa*ted
t*ll she heard a l*ttle an*mal (she couldn’t guess of what sort *t was)
scratch*ng and scrambl*ng about *n the ch*mney close above her: then,
say*ng to herself ‘Th** ** *ill,’ she gave one sharp k*ck, and wa*ted to
see what would happen next.

The f*rst th*ng she heard was a general chorus of ‘There goes *ill!’
then the *abb*t’s vo*ce along--‘*atch h*m, you by the hedge!’ then
s*lence, and then another confus*on of vo*ces--‘*old up h** head--*randy
now--*on’t choke h*m--*ow was *t, old fellow? *hat happened to you? Tell
us all about *t!’

*ast came a l*ttle feeble, squeak*ng vo*ce, [‘That’s *ill,’ thought
*l*ce,) ‘*ell, * hardly know--*o more, thank ye; *’m better now--but *’m
a deal too flustered to tell you--all * know **, someth*ng comes at me
l*ke a *ack-*n-the-box, and up * goes l*ke a sky-rocket!’

‘*o you d*d, old fellow!’ sa*d the others.

‘*e must burn the house down!’ sa*d the *abb*t’s vo*ce; and *l*ce called
out as loud as she could, ‘*f you do. *’ll set *inah at you!’

There was a dead s*lence *nstantly, and *l*ce thought to herself, ‘*
wonder what they **** do next! *f they had any sense, they’d take the
roof off.’ *fter a m*nute or two, they began mov*ng about aga*n, and
*l*ce heard the *abb*t say, ‘* barrowful w*ll do, to beg*n w*th.’

‘* barrowful of ****?’ thought *l*ce; but she had not long to doubt,
for the next moment a shower of l*ttle pebbles came rattl*ng *n at the
w*ndow, and some of them h*t her *n the face. ‘*’ll put a stop to th**,’
she sa*d to herself, and shouted out, ‘*ou’d better not do **** aga*n!’
wh*ch produced another dead s*lence.

*l*ce not*ced w*th some surpr**e **** the pebbles were all turn*ng *nto
l*ttle cakes as they lay on the floor, and a br*ght *dea came *nto her
head. ‘*f * eat one of these cakes,’ she thought, ‘*t’s sure to make
**** change *n my s*ze; and as *t can’t poss*bly make me larger, *t must
make me smaller, * suppose.’

*o she swallowed one of the cakes, and was del*ghted to f*nd **** she
began shr*nk*ng d*rectly. *s soon as she was small enough to get through
the door, she ran out of the house, and found qu*te a crowd of l*ttle
an*mals and ***** wa*t*ng outs*de. The poor l*ttle *izard, *ill, was
*n the m*ddle, be*ng held up by two gu*nea-p*gs, who were g*v*ng *t
someth*ng out of a bottle. They all made a rush at *l*ce the moment she
appeared; but she ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself
safe *n a th*ck wood.

‘The f*rst th*ng *’ve got to do,’ sa*d *l*ce to herself, as she wandered
about *n the wood, ‘** to grow to my r*ght s*ze aga*n; and the second
th*ng ** to f*nd my way *nto **** lovely garden. * th*nk **** w*ll be
the best plan.’

*t sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and s*mply
arranged; the only d*ff*culty was, **** she had not the smallest *dea
how to set about *t; and wh*le she was peer*ng about anx*ously among
the trees, a l*ttle sharp bark just over her head made her look up *n a
great hurry.

*n enormous puppy was look*ng down at her w*th large round eyes, and
feebly stretch*ng out one paw, try*ng to touch her. ‘*oor l*ttle th*ng!’
sa*d *l*ce, *n a coax*ng tone, and she tr*ed hard to wh**tle to *t; but
she was terr*bly fr*ghtened all the t*me at the thought **** *t m*ght be
hungry, *n wh*ch case *t would be very l*kely to eat her up *n sp*te of
all her coax*ng.

*ardly know*ng what she d*d, she p*cked up a l*ttle b*t of st*ck, and
held *t out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped *nto the a*r off
all *ts feet at once, w*th a yelp of del*ght, and rushed at the st*ck,
and made bel*eve to worry *t; then *l*ce dodged beh*nd a great th**tle,
to keep herself from be*ng run over; and the moment she appeared on the
other s*de, the puppy made another rush at the st*ck, and tumbled head
over heels *n *ts hurry to get hold of *t; then *l*ce, th*nk*ng *t was
very l*ke hav*ng a game of play w*th a cart-horse, and expect*ng every
moment to be trampled under *ts feet, ran round the th**tle aga*n; then
the puppy began a ser*es of short charges at the st*ck, runn*ng a very
l*ttle way forwards each t*me and a long way back, and bark*ng hoarsely
all the wh*le, t*ll at last *t sat down a good way off, pant*ng, w*th
*ts tongue hang*ng out of *ts mouth, and *ts great eyes half shut.

Th** seemed to *l*ce a good opportun*ty for mak*ng her escape; so she
set off at once, and ran t*ll she was qu*te t*red and out of breath, and
t*ll the puppy’s bark sounded qu*te fa*nt *n the d**tance.

‘*nd yet what a dear l*ttle puppy *t was!’ sa*d *l*ce, as she leant
aga*nst a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself w*th one of the
leaves: ‘* should have l*ked teach*ng *t tr*cks very much, *f--*f *’d
only been the r*ght s*ze to do *t! *h dear! *’d nearly forgotten ****
*’ve got to grow up aga*n! *et me see--how ** *t to be ***aged? *
suppose * ought to eat or dr*nk someth*ng or other; but the great
quest*on **, what?’

The great quest*on certa*nly was, what? *l*ce looked all round her at
the flowers and the blades of grass, but she d*d not see anyth*ng ****
looked l*ke the r*ght th*ng to eat or dr*nk under the c*rcumstances.
There was a large mushroom grow*ng near her, about the same he*ght as
herself; and when she had looked under *t, and on both s*des of *t, and
beh*nd *t, *t occurred to her **** she m*ght as well look and see what
was on the top of *t.

*he stretched herself up on t*ptoe, and peeped over the edge of the
mushroom, and her eyes *mmed*ately met those of a large caterp*llar,
**** was s*tt*ng on the top w*th *ts arms folded, qu*etly smok*ng a long
hookah, and tak*ng not the smallest not*ce of her or of anyth*ng else.




******* *. *dv*ce from a *aterp*llar

The *aterp*llar and *l*ce looked at each other for some t*me *n s*lence:
at last the *aterp*llar took the hookah out of *ts mouth, and addressed
her *n a langu*d, sleepy vo*ce.

‘*ho are ***?’ sa*d the *aterp*llar.

Th** was not an encourag*ng open*ng for a conversat*on. *l*ce repl*ed,
rather shyly, ‘*--* hardly know, s*r, just at present--at least * know
who * *** when * got up th** morn*ng, but * th*nk * must have been
changed several t*mes s*nce then.’

‘*hat do you mean by ****?’ sa*d the *aterp*llar sternly. ‘*xpla*n
yourself!’

‘* can’t expla*n ******, *’m afra*d, s*r’ sa*d *l*ce, ‘because *’m not
myself, you see.’

‘* don’t see,’ sa*d the *aterp*llar.

‘*’m afra*d * can’t put *t more clearly,’ *l*ce repl*ed very pol*tely,
‘for * can’t understand *t myself to beg*n w*th; and be*ng so ***y
d*fferent s*zes *n a day ** very confus*ng.’

‘*t **n’t,’ sa*d the *aterp*llar.

‘*ell, perhaps you haven’t found *t so yet,’ sa*d *l*ce; ‘but when you
have to turn *nto a chrysal**--you w*ll some day, you know--and then
after **** *nto a butterfly, * should th*nk you’ll feel *t a l*ttle
queer, won’t you?’

‘*ot a b*t,’ sa*d the *aterp*llar.

‘*ell, perhaps your feel*ngs may be d*fferent,’ sa*d *l*ce; ‘all * know
**, *t would feel very queer to **.’

‘*ou!’ sa*d the *aterp*llar contemptuously. ‘*ho are ***?’

*h*ch brought them back aga*n to the beg*nn*ng of the conversat*on.
*l*ce felt a l*ttle *rr*tated at the *aterp*llar’s mak*ng such ****
short remarks, and she drew herself up and sa*d, very gravely, ‘* th*nk,
you ought to tell me who *** are, f*rst.’

‘*hy?’ sa*d the *aterp*llar.

*ere was another puzzl*ng quest*on; and as *l*ce could not th*nk of any
good reason, and as the *aterp*llar seemed to be *n a **** unpleasant
state of m*nd, she turned away.

‘*ome back!’ the *aterp*llar called after her. ‘*’ve someth*ng *mportant
to say!’

Th** sounded prom**ing, certa*nly: *l*ce turned and came back aga*n.

‘*eep your temper,’ sa*d the *aterp*llar.

‘*s **** all?’ sa*d *l*ce, swallow*ng down her anger as well as she
could.

‘*o,’ sa*d the *aterp*llar.

*l*ce thought she m*ght as well wa*t, as she had noth*ng else to do, and
perhaps after all *t m*ght tell her someth*ng worth hear*ng. *or some
m*nutes *t puffed away w*thout speak*ng, but at last *t unfolded *ts
arms, took the hookah out of *ts mouth aga*n, and sa*d, ‘*o you th*nk
you’re changed, do you?’

‘*’m afra*d * am, s*r,’ sa*d *l*ce; ‘* can’t remember th*ngs as *
used--and * don’t keep the same s*ze for ten m*nutes together!’

‘*an’t remember **** th*ngs?’ sa*d the *aterp*llar.

‘*ell, *’ve tr*ed to say “*** **** *** ****** **** ***,” but *t all came
d*fferent!’ *l*ce repl*ed *n a very melancholy vo*ce.

‘*epeat, “*** *** ***, ****** ****I**,”’ sa*d the *aterp*llar.

*l*ce folded her hands, and began:--

   ‘*ou are old, *ather *ill*am,’ the young *** sa*d,
    ‘*nd your ha*r has become very wh*te;
   *nd yet you *ncessantly stand on your head--
    *o you th*nk, at your age, *t ** r*ght?’

   ‘*n my youth,’ *ather *ill*am repl*ed to h** son,
    ‘* feared *t m*ght *njure the bra*n;
   *ut, now **** *’m perfectly sure * have none,
    *hy, * do *t aga*n and aga*n.’

   ‘*ou are old,’ sa*d the youth, ‘as * ment*oned before,
    *nd have grown most uncommonly fat;
   *et you turned a back-somersault *n at the door--
    *ray, what ** the reason of ****?’

   ‘*n my youth,’ sa*d the sage, as he shook h** grey locks,
    ‘* kept all my l*mbs very supple
   *y the use of th** o*ntment--one sh*ll*ng the box--
    *llow me to sell you a couple?’

   ‘*ou are old,’ sa*d the youth, ‘and your jaws are too weak
    *or anyth*ng tougher than suet;
   *et you f*n**hed the goose, w*th the bones and the beak--
    *ray how d*d you ***age to do *t?’

   ‘*n my youth,’ sa*d h** father, ‘* took to the law,
    *nd argued each case w*th my w*fe;
   *nd the muscular strength, wh*ch *t gave to my jaw,
    *as lasted the rest of my l*fe.’

   ‘*ou are old,’ sa*d the youth, ‘one would hardly suppose
    That your eye was as steady as ever;
   *et you balanced an eel on the end of your nose--
    *hat made you so awfully clever?’

   ‘* have answered three quest*ons, and **** ** enough,’
    *a*d h** father; ‘don’t g*ve yourself a*rs!
   *o you th*nk * can l**ten all day to such stuff?
    *e off, or *’ll k*ck you down sta*rs!’


‘That ** not sa*d r*ght,’ sa*d the *aterp*llar.

‘*ot ***** r*ght, *’m afra*d,’ sa*d *l*ce, t*m*dly; ‘some of the *****
have got altered.’

‘*t ** wrong from beg*nn*ng to end,’ sa*d the *aterp*llar dec*dedly, and
there was s*lence for some m*nutes.

The *aterp*llar was the f*rst to speak.

‘*hat s*ze do you want to be?’ *t asked.

‘*h, *’m not part*cular as to s*ze,’ *l*ce hast*ly repl*ed; ‘only one
doesn’t l*ke ******** so often, you know.’

‘* ***’T know,’ sa*d the *aterp*llar.

*l*ce sa*d noth*ng: she had never been so much contrad*cted *n her l*fe
before, and she felt **** she was los*ng her temper.

‘*re you content now?’ sa*d the *aterp*llar.

‘*ell, * should l*ke to be a ****** larger, s*r, *f you wouldn’t m*nd,’
sa*d *l*ce: ‘three *nches ** such a wretched he*ght to be.’

‘*t ** a very good he*ght *ndeed!’ sa*d the *aterp*llar angr*ly, rear*ng
*tself upr*ght as *t spoke (*t was exactly three *nches h*gh).

‘*ut *’m not used to *t!’ pleaded poor *l*ce *n a p*teous tone. *nd
she thought of herself, ‘* w**h the creatures wouldn’t be so eas*ly
offended!’

‘*ou’ll get used to *t *n t*me,’ sa*d the *aterp*llar; and *t put the
hookah *nto *ts mouth and began smok*ng aga*n.

Th** t*me *l*ce wa*ted pat*ently unt*l *t chose to speak aga*n. *n
a m*nute or two the *aterp*llar took the hookah out of *ts mouth
and yawned once or tw*ce, and shook *tself. Then *t got down off the
mushroom, and crawled away *n the grass, merely remark*ng as *t went,
‘*ne s*de w*ll make you grow taller, and the other s*de w*ll make you
grow shorter.’

‘*ne s*de of ****? The other s*de of ****?’ thought *l*ce to herself.

‘*f the mushroom,’ sa*d the *aterp*llar, just as *f she had asked *t
aloud; and *n another moment *t was out of s*ght.

*l*ce rema*ned look*ng thoughtfully at the mushroom for a m*nute, try*ng
to make out wh*ch were the two s*des of *t; and as *t was perfectly
round, she found th** a very d*ff*cult quest*on. *owever, at last she
stretched her arms round *t as far as they would go, and broke off a b*t
of the edge w*th each hand.

‘*nd now wh*ch ** wh*ch?’ she sa*d to herself, and n*bbled a l*ttle of
the r*ght-hand b*t to try the effect: the next moment she felt a v*olent
blow underneath her ch*n: *t had struck her foot!

*he was a good deal fr*ghtened by th** very sudden change, but she felt
**** there was no t*me to be lost, as she was shr*nk*ng rap*dly; so she
set to work at once to eat some of the other b*t. *er ch*n was pressed
so closely aga*nst her foot, **** there was hardly room to open her
mouth; but she d*d *t at last, and ***aged to swallow a morsel of the
lefthand b*t.


  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

‘*ome, my head’s free at last!’ sa*d *l*ce *n a tone of del*ght, wh*ch
changed *nto alarm *n another moment, when she found **** her shoulders
were nowhere to be found: all she could see, when she looked down, was
an *mmense length of neck, wh*ch seemed to r**e l*ke a stalk out of a
sea of green leaves **** lay far below her.

‘*hat *** all **** green stuff be?’ sa*d *l*ce. ‘*nd where **** my
shoulders got to? *nd oh, my poor hands, how ** *t * can’t see you?’
*he was mov*ng them about as she spoke, but no result seemed to follow,
except a l*ttle shak*ng among the d**tant green leaves.

*s there seemed to be no chance of gett*ng her hands up to her head, she
tr*ed to get her head down to them, and was del*ghted to f*nd **** her
neck would bend about eas*ly *n any d*rect*on, l*ke a serpent. *he had
just succeeded *n curv*ng *t down *nto a graceful z*gzag, and was *****
to d*ve *n among the leaves, wh*ch she found to be noth*ng but the tops
of the trees under wh*ch she had been wander*ng, when a sharp h**s made
her draw back *n a hurry: a large p*geon had flown *nto her face, and
was beat*ng her v*olently w*th *ts w*ngs.

‘*erpent!’ screamed the *igeon.

‘*’m *** a serpent!’ sa*d *l*ce *nd*gnantly. ‘*et me alone!’

‘*erpent, * say aga*n!’ repeated the *igeon, but *n a more subdued tone,
and added w*th a k*nd of sob, ‘*’ve tr*ed every way, and noth*ng seems
to su*t them!’

‘* haven’t the least *dea what you’re talk*ng about,’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*’ve tr*ed the roots of trees, and *’ve tr*ed banks, and *’ve tr*ed
hedges,’ the *igeon went on, w*thout attend*ng to her; ‘but those
serpents! There’s no pleas*ng them!’

*l*ce was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no use *n
say*ng anyth*ng more t*ll the *igeon had f*n**hed.

‘*s *f *t wasn’t trouble enough hatch*ng the eggs,’ sa*d the *igeon;
‘but * must be on the look-out for serpents n*ght and day! *hy, *
haven’t had a w*nk of sleep these three weeks!’

‘*’m very sorry you’ve been annoyed,’ sa*d *l*ce, who was beg*nn*ng to
see *ts mean*ng.

‘*nd just as *’d taken the h*ghest tree *n the wood,’ cont*nued the
*igeon, ra**ing *ts vo*ce to a shr*ek, ‘and just as * was th*nk*ng *
should be free of them at last, they must needs come wr*ggl*ng down from
the sky! *gh, *erpent!’

‘*ut *’m *** a serpent, * tell you!’ sa*d *l*ce. ‘*’m a--*’m a--’

‘*ell! **** are you?’ sa*d the *igeon. ‘* can see you’re try*ng to
*nvent someth*ng!’

‘*--*’m a l*ttle g*rl,’ sa*d *l*ce, rather doubtfully, as she remembered
the number of changes she had gone through **** day.

‘* l*kely story *ndeed!’ sa*d the *igeon *n a tone of the deepest
contempt. ‘*’ve seen a good ***y l*ttle g*rls *n my t*me, but never ***
w*th such a neck as ****! *o, no! *ou’re a serpent; and there’s no use
deny*ng *t. * suppose you’ll be tell*ng me next **** you never tasted an
egg!’

‘* **** tasted eggs, certa*nly,’ sa*d *l*ce, who was a very truthful
ch*ld; ‘but l*ttle g*rls eat eggs qu*te as much as serpents do, you
know.’

‘* don’t bel*eve *t,’ sa*d the *igeon; ‘but *f they do, why then they’re
a k*nd of serpent, ****’s all * can say.’

Th** was such a new *dea to *l*ce, **** she was qu*te s*lent for a
m*nute or two, wh*ch gave the *igeon the opportun*ty of add*ng, ‘*ou’re
look*ng for eggs, * know **** well enough; and what does *t matter to me
whether you’re a l*ttle g*rl or a serpent?’

‘*t matters a good deal to **,’ sa*d *l*ce hast*ly; ‘but *’m not look*ng
for eggs, as *t happens; and *f * was, * shouldn’t want *****: * don’t
l*ke them raw.’

‘*ell, be off, then!’ sa*d the *igeon *n a sulky tone, as *t settled
down aga*n *nto *ts nest. *l*ce crouched down among the trees as well as
she could, for her neck kept gett*ng entangled among the branches, and
every now and then she had to stop and untw**t *t. *fter a wh*le she
remembered **** she st*ll held the p*eces of mushroom *n her hands, and
she set to work very carefully, n*bbl*ng f*rst at one and then at the
other, and grow*ng somet*mes taller and somet*mes shorter, unt*l she had
succeeded *n br*ng*ng herself down to her usual he*ght.

*t was so long s*nce she had been anyth*ng near the r*ght s*ze, **** *t
felt qu*te strange at f*rst; but she got used to *t *n a few m*nutes,
and began talk*ng to herself, as usual. ‘*ome, there’s half my plan done
now! *ow puzzl*ng all these changes are! *’m never sure what *’m *****
to be, from one m*nute to another! *owever, *’ve got back to my r*ght
s*ze: the next th*ng **, to get *nto **** beaut*ful garden--how ** ****
to be done, * wonder?’ *s she sa*d th**, she came suddenly upon an open
place, w*th a l*ttle house *n *t about four feet h*gh. ‘*hoever l*ves
there,’ thought *l*ce, ‘*t’ll never do to come upon them **** s*ze: why,
* should fr*ghten them out of the*r w*ts!’ *o she began n*bbl*ng at the
r*ghthand b*t aga*n, and d*d not venture to go near the house t*ll she
had brought herself down to n*ne *nches h*gh.




******* *I. *ig and *epper

*or a m*nute or two she stood look*ng at the house, and wonder*ng what
to do next, when suddenly a foot*** *n l*very came runn*ng out of the
wood--(she cons*dered h*m to be a foot*** because he was *n l*very:
otherw**e, judg*ng by h** face only, she would have called h*m a
f**h)--and rapped loudly at the door w*th h** knuckles. *t was opened
by another foot*** *n l*very, w*th a round face, and large eyes l*ke a
frog; and both footmen, *l*ce not*ced, had powdered ha*r **** curled all
over the*r heads. *he felt very cur*ous to know what *t was all about,
and crept a l*ttle way out of the wood to l**ten.

The *ish-*oot*** began by produc*ng from under h** arm a great ******,
nearly as large as h*mself, and th** he handed over to the other,
say*ng, *n a solemn tone, ‘*or the *uchess. *n *nv*tat*on from the *ueen
to play croquet.’ The *rog-*oot*** repeated, *n the same solemn tone,
only ******** the order of the ***** a l*ttle, ‘*rom the *ueen. *n
*nv*tat*on for the *uchess to play croquet.’

Then they both bowed low, and the*r curls got entangled together.

*l*ce laughed so much at th**, **** she had to run back *nto the
wood for fear of the*r hear*ng her; and when she next peeped out the
*ish-*oot*** was gone, and the other was s*tt*ng on the ground near the
door, star*ng stup*dly up *nto the sky.

*l*ce went t*m*dly up to the door, and knocked.

‘There’s no sort of use *n knock*ng,’ sa*d the *oot***, ‘and **** for
two reasons. *irst, because *’m on the same s*de of the door as you
are; secondly, because they’re mak*ng such a no**e *ns*de, no one could
poss*bly hear you.’ *nd certa*nly there was a most extraord*nary no**e
***** on w*th*n--a constant howl*ng and sneez*ng, and every now and then
a great crash, as *f a d**h or kettle had been broken to p*eces.

‘*lease, then,’ sa*d *l*ce, ‘how am * to get *n?’

‘There m*ght be some sense *n your knock*ng,’ the *oot*** went on
w*thout attend*ng to her, ‘*f we had the door between us. *or *nstance,
*f you were ******, you m*ght knock, and * could let you out, you know.’
*e was look*ng up *nto the sky all the t*me he was speak*ng, and th**
*l*ce thought dec*dedly unc*v*l. ‘*ut perhaps he can’t help *t,’ she
sa*d to herself; ‘h** eyes are so **** nearly at the top of h** head.
*ut at any rate he m*ght answer quest*ons.--*ow am * to get *n?’ she
repeated, aloud.

‘* shall s*t here,’ the *oot*** remarked, ‘t*ll tomorrow--’

*t th** moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate came
sk*mm*ng out, stra*ght at the *oot***’s head: *t just grazed h** nose,
and broke to p*eces aga*nst one of the trees beh*nd h*m.

‘--or next day, maybe,’ the *oot*** cont*nued *n the same tone, exactly
as *f noth*ng had happened.

‘*ow am * to get *n?’ asked *l*ce aga*n, *n a louder tone.

‘*** you to get *n at all?’ sa*d the *oot***. ‘That’s the f*rst
quest*on, you know.’

*t was, no doubt: only *l*ce d*d not l*ke to be told so. ‘*t’s really
dreadful,’ she muttered to herself, ‘the way all the creatures argue.
*t’s enough to dr*ve one crazy!’

The *oot*** seemed to th*nk th** a good opportun*ty for repeat*ng h**
remark, w*th var*at*ons. ‘* shall s*t here,’ he sa*d, ‘on and off, for
days and days.’

‘*ut what am * to do?’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*nyth*ng you l*ke,’ sa*d the *oot***, and began wh**tl*ng.

‘*h, there’s no use *n talk*ng to h*m,’ sa*d *l*ce desperately: ‘he’s
perfectly *d*ot*c!’ *nd she opened the door and went *n.

The door led r*ght *nto a large k*tchen, wh*ch was full of smoke from
one end to the other: the *uchess was s*tt*ng on a three-legged stool *n
the m*ddle, nurs*ng a baby; the cook was lean*ng over the f*re, st*rr*ng
a large cauldron wh*ch seemed to be full of soup.

‘There’s certa*nly too much pepper *n **** soup!’ *l*ce sa*d to herself,
as well as she could for sneez*ng.

There was certa*nly too much of *t *n the a*r. *ven the *uchess
sneezed occas*onally; and as for the baby, *t was sneez*ng and howl*ng
alternately w*thout a moment’s pause. The only th*ngs *n the k*tchen
**** d*d not sneeze, were the cook, and a large cat wh*ch was s*tt*ng on
the hearth and gr*nn*ng from ear to ear.

‘*lease would you tell me,’ sa*d *l*ce, a l*ttle t*m*dly, for she was
not qu*te sure whether *t was good ***ners for her to speak f*rst, ‘why
your cat gr*ns l*ke ****?’

‘*t’s a *hesh*re cat,’ sa*d the *uchess, ‘and ****’s why. *ig!’

*he sa*d the last word w*th such sudden v*olence **** *l*ce qu*te
jumped; but she saw *n another moment **** *t was addressed to the baby,
and not to her, so she took courage, and went on aga*n:--

‘* d*dn’t know **** *hesh*re cats always gr*nned; *n fact, * d*dn’t know
**** cats ***** gr*n.’

‘They all can,’ sa*d the *uchess; ‘and most of ‘em do.’

‘* don’t know of any **** do,’ *l*ce sa*d very pol*tely, feel*ng qu*te
pleased to have got *nto a conversat*on.

‘*ou don’t know much,’ sa*d the *uchess; ‘and ****’s a fact.’

*l*ce d*d not at all l*ke the tone of th** remark, and thought *t would
be as well to *ntroduce some other subject of conversat*on. *h*le she
was try*ng to f*x on one, the cook took the cauldron of soup off the
f*re, and at once set to work throw*ng everyth*ng w*th*n her reach at
the *uchess and the baby--the f*re-*rons came f*rst; then followed a
shower of saucepans, plates, and d**hes. The *uchess took no not*ce of
them even when they h*t her; and the baby was howl*ng so much already,
**** *t was qu*te *mposs*ble to say whether the blows hurt *t or not.

‘*h, ****** m*nd what you’re do*ng!’ cr*ed *l*ce, jump*ng up and down *n
an agony of terror. ‘*h, there goes h** ******** nose’; as an unusually
large saucepan flew close by *t, and very nearly carr*ed *t off.

‘*f everybody m*nded the*r own bus*ness,’ the *uchess sa*d *n a hoarse
growl, ‘the world would go round a deal faster than *t does.’

‘*h*ch would *** be an advantage,’ sa*d *l*ce, who felt very glad to get
an opportun*ty of show*ng off a l*ttle of her knowledge. ‘*ust th*nk of
what work *t would make w*th the day and n*ght! *ou see the earth takes
twenty-four hours to turn round on *ts ax**--’

‘Talk*ng of axes,’ sa*d the *uchess, ‘chop off her head!’

*l*ce glanced rather anx*ously at the cook, to see *f she meant to take
the h*nt; but the cook was bus*ly st*rr*ng the soup, and seemed not to
be l**ten*ng, so she went on aga*n: ‘Twenty-four hours, * *****; or **
*t twelve? *--’

‘*h, don’t bother **,’ sa*d the *uchess; ‘* never could ab*de f*gures!’
*nd w*th **** she began nurs*ng her ch*ld aga*n, s*ng*ng a sort of
lullaby to *t as she d*d so, and g*v*ng *t a v*olent shake at the end of
every l*ne:

   ‘*peak roughly to your l*ttle boy,
    *nd beat h*m when he sneezes:
   *e only does *t to annoy,
    *ecause he knows *t teases.’

         ******.

 (*n wh*ch the cook and the baby jo*ned):--

       ‘*ow! wow! wow!’

*h*le the *uchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept toss*ng
the baby v*olently up and down, and the poor l*ttle th*ng howled so,
**** *l*ce could hardly hear the *****:--

   ‘* speak severely to my boy,
    * beat h*m when he sneezes;
   *or he can thoroughly enjoy
    The pepper when he pleases!’

         ******.

       ‘*ow! wow! wow!’

‘*ere! you may nurse *t a b*t, *f you l*ke!’ the *uchess sa*d to *l*ce,
fl*ng*ng the baby at her as she spoke. ‘* must go and get ready to play
croquet w*th the *ueen,’ and she hurr*ed out of the room. The cook threw
a fry*ng-pan after her as she went out, but *t just m**sed her.

*l*ce caught the baby w*th some d*ff*culty, as *t was a queer-shaped
l*ttle creature, and held out *ts arms and legs *n all d*rect*ons, ‘just
l*ke a star-f**h,’ thought *l*ce. The poor l*ttle th*ng was snort*ng
l*ke a steam-eng*ne when she caught *t, and kept doubl*ng *tself up and
stra*ghten*ng *tself out aga*n, so **** altogether, for the f*rst m*nute
or two, *t was as much as she could do to hold *t.

*s soon as she had made out the proper way of nurs*ng *t, (wh*ch was to
tw**t *t up *nto a sort of knot, and then keep t*ght hold of *ts r*ght
ear and left foot, so as to prevent *ts undo*ng *tself,) she carr*ed
*t out *nto the open a*r. ‘** * don’t take th** ch*ld away w*th me,’
thought *l*ce, ‘they’re sure to k*ll *t *n a day or two: wouldn’t *t be
murder to leave *t beh*nd?’ *he sa*d the last ***** out loud, and the
l*ttle th*ng grunted *n reply (*t had left off sneez*ng by th** t*me).
‘*on’t grunt,’ sa*d *l*ce; ‘****’s not at all a proper way of express*ng
yourself.’

The baby grunted aga*n, and *l*ce looked very anx*ously *nto *ts face to
see what was the matter w*th *t. There could be no doubt **** *t had
a **** turn-up nose, much more l*ke a snout than a real nose; also *ts
eyes were gett*ng extremely small for a baby: altogether *l*ce d*d not
l*ke the look of the th*ng at all. ‘*ut perhaps *t was only sobb*ng,’
she thought, and looked *nto *ts eyes aga*n, to see *f there were any
tears.

*o, there were no tears. ‘*f you’re ***** to turn *nto a p*g, my dear,’
sa*d *l*ce, ser*ously, ‘*’ll have noth*ng more to do w*th you. *ind
now!’ The poor l*ttle th*ng sobbed aga*n (or grunted, *t was *mposs*ble
to say wh*ch), and they went on for some wh*le *n s*lence.

*l*ce was just beg*nn*ng to th*nk to herself, ‘*ow, what am * to do w*th
th** creature when * get *t home?’ when *t grunted aga*n, so v*olently,
**** she looked down *nto *ts face *n some alarm. Th** t*me there could
be ** m**take about *t: *t was ne*ther more nor less than a p*g, and she
felt **** *t would be qu*te absurd for her to carry *t further.

*o she set the l*ttle creature down, and felt qu*te rel*eved to see
*t trot away qu*etly *nto the wood. ‘*f *t had grown up,’ she sa*d
to herself, ‘*t would have made a dreadfully ugly ch*ld: but *t makes
rather a handsome p*g, * th*nk.’ *nd she began th*nk*ng over other
ch*ldren she knew, who m*ght do very well as p*gs, and was just say*ng
to herself, ‘*f one only knew the r*ght way to change them--’ when she
was a l*ttle startled by see*ng the *hesh*re *at s*tt*ng on a bough of a
tree a few yards off.

The *at only gr*nned when *t saw *l*ce. *t looked good-natured, she
thought: st*ll *t had **** long claws and a great ***y teeth, so she
felt **** *t ought to be treated w*th respect.

‘*hesh*re *uss,’ she began, rather t*m*dly, as she d*d not at all know
whether *t would l*ke the name: however, *t only gr*nned a l*ttle w*der.
‘*ome, *t’s pleased so far,’ thought *l*ce, and she went on. ‘*ould you
tell me, please, wh*ch way * ought to go from here?’

‘That depends a good deal on where you want to get to,’ sa*d the *at.

‘* don’t much care where--’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘Then *t doesn’t matter wh*ch way you go,’ sa*d the *at.

‘--so long as * get *********,’ *l*ce added as an explanat*on.

‘*h, you’re sure to do ****,’ sa*d the *at, ‘*f you only walk long
enough.’

*l*ce felt **** th** could not be den*ed, so she tr*ed another quest*on.
‘*hat sort of people l*ve about here?’

‘*n **** d*rect*on,’ the *at sa*d, wav*ng *ts r*ght paw round, ‘l*ves
a *atter: and *n **** d*rect*on,’ wav*ng the other paw, ‘l*ves a *arch
*are. *is*t e*ther you l*ke: they’re both mad.’

‘*ut * don’t want to go among mad people,’ *l*ce remarked.

‘*h, you can’t help ****,’ sa*d the *at: ‘we’re all mad here. *’m mad.
*ou’re mad.’

‘*ow do you know *’m mad?’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*ou must be,’ sa*d the *at, ‘or you wouldn’t have come here.’

*l*ce d*dn’t th*nk **** proved *t at all; however, she went on ‘*nd how
do you know **** you’re mad?’

‘To beg*n w*th,’ sa*d the *at, ‘a dog’s not mad. *ou grant ****?’

‘* suppose so,’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*ell, then,’ the *at went on, ‘you see, a dog growls when *t’s angry,
and wags *ts ta*l when *t’s pleased. *ow * growl when *’m pleased, and
wag my ta*l when *’m angry. Therefore *’m mad.’

‘* call *t purr*ng, not growl*ng,’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*all *t what you l*ke,’ sa*d the *at. ‘*o you play croquet w*th the
*ueen to-day?’

‘* should l*ke *t very much,’ sa*d *l*ce, ‘but * haven’t been *nv*ted
yet.’

‘*ou’ll see me there,’ sa*d the *at, and van**hed.

*l*ce was not much surpr**ed at th**, she was gett*ng so used to queer
th*ngs happen*ng. *h*le she was look*ng at the place where *t had been,
*t suddenly appeared aga*n.

‘*y-the-bye, what became of the baby?’ sa*d the *at. ‘*’d nearly
forgotten to ask.’

‘*t turned *nto a p*g,’ *l*ce qu*etly sa*d, just as *f *t had come back
*n a natural way.

‘* thought *t would,’ sa*d the *at, and van**hed aga*n.

*l*ce wa*ted a l*ttle, half expect*ng to see *t aga*n, but *t d*d not
appear, and after a m*nute or two she walked on *n the d*rect*on *n
wh*ch the *arch *are was sa*d to l*ve. ‘*’ve seen hatters before,’ she
sa*d to herself; ‘the *arch *are w*ll be much the most *nterest*ng, and
perhaps as th** ** *ay *t won’t be rav*ng mad--at least not so mad as
*t was *n *arch.’ *s she sa*d th**, she looked up, and there was the *at
aga*n, s*tt*ng on a branch of a tree.

‘*id you say p*g, or f*g?’ sa*d the *at.

‘* sa*d p*g,’ repl*ed *l*ce; ‘and * w**h you wouldn’t keep appear*ng and
van**h*ng so suddenly: you make one qu*te g*ddy.’

‘*ll r*ght,’ sa*d the *at; and th** t*me *t van**hed qu*te slowly,
beg*nn*ng w*th the end of the ta*l, and end*ng w*th the gr*n, wh*ch
rema*ned some t*me after the rest of *t had gone.

‘*ell! *’ve often seen a cat w*thout a gr*n,’ thought *l*ce; ‘but a gr*n
w*thout a cat! *t’s the most cur*ous th*ng * ever saw *n my l*fe!’

*he had not gone much farther before she came *n s*ght of the house
of the *arch *are: she thought *t must be the r*ght house, because the
ch*mneys were shaped l*ke ears and the roof was ****ched w*th fur. *t
was so large a house, **** she d*d not l*ke to go nearer t*ll she had
n*bbled some more of the lefthand b*t of mushroom, and ra**ed herself to
about two feet h*gh: even then she walked up towards *t rather t*m*dly,
say*ng to herself ‘*uppose *t should be rav*ng mad after all! * almost
w**h *’d gone to see the *atter *nstead!’




******* *I*. * *ad Tea-*arty

There was a table set out under a tree *n front of the house, and the
*arch *are and the *atter were hav*ng tea at *t: a *ormouse was s*tt*ng
between them, fast asleep, and the other two were us*ng *t as a
cush*on, rest*ng the*r elbows on *t, and talk*ng over *ts head. ‘*ery
uncomfortable for the *ormouse,’ thought *l*ce; ‘only, as *t’s asleep, *
suppose *t doesn’t m*nd.’

The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded together at
one corner of *t: ‘*o room! *o room!’ they cr*ed out when they saw *l*ce
com*ng. ‘There’s ****** of room!’ sa*d *l*ce *nd*gnantly, and she sat
down *n a large arm-cha*r at one end of the table.

‘*ave some w*ne,’ the *arch *are sa*d *n an encourag*ng tone.

*l*ce looked all round the table, but there was noth*ng on *t but tea.
‘* don’t see any w*ne,’ she remarked.

‘There **n’t any,’ sa*d the *arch *are.

‘Then *t wasn’t very c*v*l of you to offer *t,’ sa*d *l*ce angr*ly.

‘*t wasn’t very c*v*l of you to s*t down w*thout be*ng *nv*ted,’ sa*d
the *arch *are.

‘* d*dn’t know *t was **** table,’ sa*d *l*ce; ‘*t’s la*d for a great
***y more than three.’

‘*our ha*r wants cutt*ng,’ sa*d the *atter. *e had been look*ng at *l*ce
for some t*me w*th great cur*os*ty, and th** was h** f*rst speech.

‘*ou should learn not to make personal remarks,’ *l*ce sa*d w*th some
sever*ty; ‘*t’s very rude.’

The *atter opened h** eyes very w*de on hear*ng th**; but all he ****
was, ‘*hy ** a raven l*ke a wr*t*ng-desk?’

‘*ome, we shall have some fun now!’ thought *l*ce. ‘*’m glad they’ve
begun ask*ng r*ddles.--* bel*eve * can guess ****,’ she added aloud.

‘*o you mean **** you th*nk you can f*nd out the answer to *t?’ sa*d the
*arch *are.

‘*xactly so,’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘Then you should say what you mean,’ the *arch *are went on.

‘* do,’ *l*ce hast*ly repl*ed; ‘at least--at least * mean what *
say--****’s the same th*ng, you know.’

‘*ot the same th*ng a b*t!’ sa*d the *atter. ‘*ou m*ght just as well say
**** “* see what * eat” ** the same th*ng as “* eat what * see”!’

‘*ou m*ght just as well say,’ added the *arch *are, ‘**** “* l*ke what *
get” ** the same th*ng as “* get what * l*ke”!’

‘*ou m*ght just as well say,’ added the *ormouse, who seemed to be
talk*ng *n h** sleep, ‘**** “* breathe when * sleep” ** the same th*ng
as “* sleep when * breathe”!’

‘*t ** the same th*ng w*th you,’ sa*d the *atter, and here the
conversat*on dropped, and the party sat s*lent for a m*nute, wh*le *l*ce
thought over all she could remember about ravens and wr*t*ng-desks,
wh*ch wasn’t much.

The *atter was the f*rst to break the s*lence. ‘*hat day of the month
** *t?’ he sa*d, turn*ng to *l*ce: he had taken h** watch out of h**
pocket, and was look*ng at *t uneas*ly, shak*ng *t every now and then,
and hold*ng *t to h** ear.

*l*ce cons*dered a l*ttle, and then sa*d ‘The fourth.’

‘Two days wrong!’ s*ghed the *atter. ‘* told you butter wouldn’t su*t
the works!’ he added look*ng angr*ly at the *arch *are.

‘*t was the **** butter,’ the *arch *are meekly repl*ed.

‘*es, but some crumbs must have got *n as well,’ the *atter grumbled:
‘you shouldn’t have put *t *n w*th the bread-kn*fe.’

The *arch *are took the watch and looked at *t gloom*ly: then he d*pped
*t *nto h** cup of tea, and looked at *t aga*n: but he could th*nk of
noth*ng better to say than h** f*rst remark, ‘*t was the **** butter,
you know.’

*l*ce had been look*ng over h** shoulder w*th some cur*os*ty. ‘*hat a
funny watch!’ she remarked. ‘*t tells the day of the month, and doesn’t
tell what o’clock *t **!’

‘*hy should *t?’ muttered the *atter. ‘*oes **** watch tell you what
year *t **?’

‘*f course not,’ *l*ce repl*ed very read*ly: ‘but ****’s because *t
stays the same year for such a long t*me together.’

‘*h*ch ** just the case w*th ****,’ sa*d the *atter.

*l*ce felt dreadfully puzzled. The *atter’s remark seemed to have no
sort of mean*ng *n *t, and yet *t was certa*nly *ngl**h. ‘* don’t qu*te
understand you,’ she sa*d, as pol*tely as she could.

‘The *ormouse ** asleep aga*n,’ sa*d the *atter, and he poured a l*ttle
hot tea upon *ts nose.

The *ormouse shook *ts head *mpat*ently, and sa*d, w*thout open*ng *ts
eyes, ‘*f course, of course; just what * was ***** to remark myself.’

‘*ave you guessed the r*ddle yet?’ the *atter sa*d, turn*ng to *l*ce
aga*n.

‘*o, * g*ve *t up,’ *l*ce repl*ed: ‘what’s the answer?’

‘* haven’t the sl*ghtest *dea,’ sa*d the *atter.

‘*or *,’ sa*d the *arch *are.

*l*ce s*ghed wear*ly. ‘* th*nk you m*ght do someth*ng better w*th the
t*me,’ she sa*d, ‘than waste *t *n ask*ng r*ddles **** have no answers.’

‘*f you knew T*me as well as * do,’ sa*d the *atter, ‘you wouldn’t talk
about wast*ng **. *t’s ***.’

‘* don’t know what you mean,’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*f course you don’t!’ the *atter sa*d, toss*ng h** head contemptuously.
‘* dare say you never even spoke to T*me!’

‘*erhaps not,’ *l*ce caut*ously repl*ed: ‘but * know * have to beat t*me
when * learn mus*c.’

‘*h! **** accounts for *t,’ sa*d the *atter. ‘*e won’t stand beat*ng.
*ow, *f you only kept on good terms w*th h*m, he’d do almost anyth*ng
you l*ked w*th the clock. *or *nstance, suppose *t were n*ne o’clock *n
the morn*ng, just t*me to beg*n lessons: you’d only have to wh**per a
h*nt to T*me, and round goes the clock *n a tw*nkl*ng! *alf-past one,
t*me for d*nner!’

[‘* only w**h *t was,’ the *arch *are sa*d to *tself *n a wh**per.)

‘That would be grand, certa*nly,’ sa*d *l*ce thoughtfully: ‘but then--*
shouldn’t be hungry for *t, you know.’

‘*ot at f*rst, perhaps,’ sa*d the *atter: ‘but you could keep *t to
half-past one as long as you l*ked.’

‘*s **** the way *** ***age?’ *l*ce asked.

The *atter shook h** head mournfully. ‘*ot *!’ he repl*ed. ‘*e
quarrelled last *arch--just before ** went mad, you know--’ (po*nt*ng
w*th h** tea spoon at the *arch *are,) ‘--*t was at the great concert
g*ven by the *ueen of *earts, and * had to s*ng

     “Tw*nkle, tw*nkle, l*ttle bat!
     *ow * wonder what you’re at!”

*ou know the song, perhaps?’

‘*’ve heard someth*ng l*ke *t,’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*t goes on, you know,’ the *atter cont*nued, ‘*n th** way:--

     “*p above the world you fly,
     *ike a tea-tray *n the sky.
         Tw*nkle, tw*nkle--“’

*ere the *ormouse shook *tself, and began s*ng*ng *n *ts sleep ‘Tw*nkle,
tw*nkle, tw*nkle, tw*nkle--’ and went on so long **** they had to p*nch
*t to make *t stop.

‘*ell, *’d hardly f*n**hed the f*rst verse,’ sa*d the *atter, ‘when the
*ueen jumped up and bawled out, “*e’s murder*ng the t*me! *ff w*th h**
head!”’

‘*ow dreadfully savage!’ excla*med *l*ce.

‘*nd ever s*nce ****,’ the *atter went on *n a mournful tone, ‘he won’t
do a th*ng * ask! *t’s always s*x o’clock now.’

* br*ght *dea came *nto *l*ce’s head. ‘*s **** the reason so ***y
tea-th*ngs are put out here?’ she asked.

‘*es, ****’s *t,’ sa*d the *atter w*th a s*gh: ‘*t’s always tea-t*me,
and we’ve no t*me to wash the th*ngs between wh*les.’

‘Then you keep mov*ng round, * suppose?’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*xactly so,’ sa*d the *atter: ‘as the th*ngs get used up.’

‘*ut what happens when you come to the beg*nn*ng aga*n?’ *l*ce ventured
to ask.

‘*uppose we change the subject,’ the *arch *are *nterrupted, yawn*ng.
‘*’m gett*ng t*red of th**. * vote the young lady tells us a story.’

‘*’m afra*d * don’t know one,’ sa*d *l*ce, rather alarmed at the
proposal.

‘Then the *ormouse shall!’ they both cr*ed. ‘*ake up, *ormouse!’ *nd
they p*nched *t on both s*des at once.

The *ormouse slowly opened h** eyes. ‘* wasn’t asleep,’ he sa*d *n a
hoarse, feeble vo*ce: ‘* heard every word you fellows were say*ng.’

‘Tell us a story!’ sa*d the *arch *are.

‘*es, please do!’ pleaded *l*ce.

‘*nd be qu*ck about *t,’ added the *atter, ‘or you’ll be asleep aga*n
before *t’s done.’

‘*nce upon a t*me there were three l*ttle s**ters,’ the *ormouse began
*n a great hurry; ‘and the*r names were *ls*e, *ac*e, and T*ll*e; and
they l*ved at the bottom of a well--’

‘*hat d*d they l*ve on?’ sa*d *l*ce, who always took a great *nterest *n
quest*ons of eat*ng and dr*nk*ng.

‘They l*ved on treacle,’ sa*d the *ormouse, after th*nk*ng a m*nute or
two.

‘They couldn’t have done ****, you know,’ *l*ce gently remarked; ‘they’d
have been *ll.’

‘*o they were,’ sa*d the *ormouse; ‘**** *ll.’

*l*ce tr*ed to fancy to herself what such an extraord*nary ways of
l*v*ng would be l*ke, but *t puzzled her too much, so she went on: ‘*ut
why d*d they l*ve at the bottom of a well?’

‘Take some more tea,’ the *arch *are sa*d to *l*ce, very earnestly.

‘*’ve had noth*ng yet,’ *l*ce repl*ed *n an offended tone, ‘so * can’t
take more.’

‘*ou mean you can’t take ****,’ sa*d the *atter: ‘*t’s very easy to take
**** than noth*ng.’

‘*obody asked **** op*n*on,’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*ho’s mak*ng personal remarks now?’ the *atter asked tr*umphantly.

*l*ce d*d not qu*te know what to say to th**: so she helped herself
to some tea and bread-and-butter, and then turned to the *ormouse, and
repeated her quest*on. ‘*hy d*d they l*ve at the bottom of a well?’

The *ormouse aga*n took a m*nute or two to th*nk about *t, and then
sa*d, ‘*t was a treacle-well.’

‘There’s no such th*ng!’ *l*ce was beg*nn*ng very angr*ly, but the
*atter and the *arch *are went ‘*h! sh!’ and the *ormouse sulk*ly
remarked, ‘*f you can’t be c*v*l, you’d better f*n**h the story for
yourself.’

‘*o, please go on!’ *l*ce sa*d very humbly; ‘* won’t *nterrupt aga*n. *
dare say there may be ***.’

‘*ne, *ndeed!’ sa*d the *ormouse *nd*gnantly. *owever, he consented to
go on. ‘*nd so these three l*ttle s**ters--they were learn*ng to draw,
you know--’

‘*hat d*d they draw?’ sa*d *l*ce, qu*te forgett*ng her prom**e.

‘Treacle,’ sa*d the *ormouse, w*thout cons*der*ng at all th** t*me.

‘* want a clean cup,’ *nterrupted the *atter: ‘let’s all move one place
on.’

*e moved on as he spoke, and the *ormouse followed h*m: the *arch *are
moved *nto the *ormouse’s place, and *l*ce rather unw*ll*ngly took
the place of the *arch *are. The *atter was the only one who got any
advantage from the change: and *l*ce was a good deal worse off than
before, as the *arch *are had just upset the m*lk-jug *nto h** plate.

*l*ce d*d not w**h to offend the *ormouse aga*n, so she began very
caut*ously: ‘*ut * don’t understand. *here d*d they draw the treacle
from?’

‘*ou can draw water out of a water-well,’ sa*d the *atter; ‘so * should
th*nk you could draw treacle out of a treacle-well--eh, stup*d?’

‘*ut they were ** the well,’ *l*ce sa*d to the *ormouse, not choos*ng to
not*ce th** last remark.

‘*f course they were’, sa*d the *ormouse; ‘--well *n.’

Th** answer so confused poor *l*ce, **** she let the *ormouse go on for
some t*me w*thout *nterrupt*ng *t.

‘They were learn*ng to draw,’ the *ormouse went on, yawn*ng and rubb*ng
*ts eyes, for *t was gett*ng very sleepy; ‘and they drew all ***ner of
th*ngs--everyth*ng **** beg*ns w*th an *--’

‘*hy w*th an *?’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*hy not?’ sa*d the *arch *are.

*l*ce was s*lent.

The *ormouse had closed *ts eyes by th** t*me, and was ***** off *nto
a doze; but, on be*ng p*nched by the *atter, *t woke up aga*n w*th
a l*ttle shr*ek, and went on: ‘--**** beg*ns w*th an *, such as
mouse-traps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness--you know you say
th*ngs are “much of a muchness”--d*d you ever see such a th*ng as a
draw*ng of a muchness?’

‘*eally, now you ask me,’ sa*d *l*ce, very much confused, ‘* don’t
th*nk--’

‘Then you shouldn’t talk,’ sa*d the *atter.

Th** p*ece of rudeness was more than *l*ce could bear: she got up *n
great d**gust, and walked off; the *ormouse fell asleep *nstantly, and
ne*ther of the others took the least not*ce of her *****, though she
looked back once or tw*ce, half hop*ng **** they would call after her:
the last t*me she saw them, they were try*ng to put the *ormouse *nto
the teapot.

‘*t any rate *’ll never go ***** aga*n!’ sa*d *l*ce as she p*cked her
way through the wood. ‘*t’s the stup*dest tea-party * ever was at *n all
my l*fe!’

*ust as she sa*d th**, she not*ced **** one of the trees had a door
lead*ng r*ght *nto *t. ‘That’s very cur*ous!’ she thought. ‘*ut
everyth*ng’s cur*ous today. * th*nk * may as well go *n at once.’ *nd *n
she went.

*nce more she found herself *n the long hall, and close to the l*ttle
glass table. ‘*ow, *’ll ***age better th** t*me,’ she sa*d to herself,
and began by tak*ng the l*ttle golden key, and unlock*ng the door ****
led *nto the garden. Then she went to work n*bbl*ng at the mushroom (she
had kept a p*ece of *t *n her pocket) t*ll she was about a foot h*gh:
then she walked down the l*ttle passage: and ****--she found herself at
last *n the beaut*ful garden, among the br*ght flower-beds and the cool
founta*ns.




******* *I*I. The *ueen’s *roquet-*round

* large rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden: the roses
grow*ng on *t were wh*te, but there were three gardeners at *t, bus*ly
pa*nt*ng them red. *l*ce thought th** a very cur*ous th*ng, and she went
nearer to watch them, and just as she came up to them she heard one of
them say, ‘*ook out now, *ive! *on’t go splash*ng pa*nt over me l*ke
****!’

‘* couldn’t help *t,’ sa*d *ive, *n a sulky tone; ‘*even jogged my
elbow.’

*n wh*ch *even looked up and sa*d, ‘That’s r*ght, *ive! *lways lay the
blame on others!’

‘***’* better not talk!’ sa*d *ive. ‘* heard the *ueen say only
yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!’

‘*hat for?’ sa*d the one who had spoken f*rst.

‘That’s none of **** bus*ness, Two!’ sa*d *even.

‘*es, *t ** h** bus*ness!’ sa*d *ive, ‘and *’ll tell h*m--*t was for
br*ng*ng the cook tul*p-roots *nstead of on*ons.’

*even flung down h** brush, and had just begun ‘*ell, of all the unjust
th*ngs--’ when h** eye chanced to fall upon *l*ce, as she stood watch*ng
them, and he checked h*mself suddenly: the others looked round also, and
all of them bowed low.

‘*ould you tell me,’ sa*d *l*ce, a l*ttle t*m*dly, ‘why you are pa*nt*ng
those roses?’

*ive and *even sa*d noth*ng, but looked at Two. Two began *n a low
vo*ce, ‘*hy the fact **, you see, *iss, th** here ought to have been a
*** rose-tree, and we put a wh*te one *n by m**take; and *f the *ueen
was to f*nd *t out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know.
*o you see, *iss, we’re do*ng our best, afore she comes, to--’ *t th**
moment *ive, who had been anx*ously look*ng across the garden, called
out ‘The *ueen! The *ueen!’ and the three gardeners *nstantly threw
themselves flat upon the*r faces. There was a sound of ***y footsteps,
and *l*ce looked round, eager to see the *ueen.

*irst came ten sold*ers carry*ng clubs; these were all shaped l*ke
the three gardeners, oblong and flat, w*th the*r hands and feet at the
corners: next the ten court*ers; these were ornamented all over w*th
d*amonds, and walked two and two, as the sold*ers d*d. *fter these came
the royal ch*ldren; there were ten of them, and the l*ttle dears came
jump*ng merr*ly along hand *n hand, *n couples: they were all ornamented
w*th hearts. *ext came the guests, mostly *ings and *ueens, and among
them *l*ce recogn**ed the *h*te *abb*t: *t was talk*ng *n a hurr*ed
nervous ***ner, sm*l*ng at everyth*ng **** was sa*d, and went by w*thout
not*c*ng her. Then followed the *nave of *earts, carry*ng the *ing’s
crown on a cr*mson velvet cush*on; and, last of all th** grand
process*on, came *** **** *** ***** ** *****S.

*l*ce was rather doubtful whether she ought not to l*e down on her face
l*ke the three gardeners, but she could not remember ever hav*ng heard
of such a rule at process*ons; ‘and bes*des, what would be the use of
a process*on,’ thought she, ‘*f people had all to l*e down upon the*r
faces, so **** they couldn’t see *t?’ *o she stood st*ll where she was,
and wa*ted.

*hen the process*on came oppos*te to *l*ce, they all stopped and looked
at her, and the *ueen sa*d severely ‘*ho ** th**?’ *he sa*d *t to the
*nave of *earts, who only bowed and sm*led *n reply.

‘*d*ot!’ sa*d the *ueen, toss*ng her head *mpat*ently; and, turn*ng to
*l*ce, she went on, ‘*hat’s your name, ch*ld?’

‘*y name ** *l*ce, so please your *ajesty,’ sa*d *l*ce very pol*tely;
but she added, to herself, ‘*hy, they’re only a pack of cards, after
all. * needn’t be afra*d of them!’

‘*nd who are *****?’ sa*d the *ueen, po*nt*ng to the three gardeners who
were ly*ng round the rosetree; for, you see, as they were ly*ng on the*r
faces, and the pattern on the*r backs was the same as the rest of the
pack, she could not tell whether they were gardeners, or sold*ers, or
court*ers, or three of her own ch*ldren.

‘*ow should * know?’ sa*d *l*ce, surpr**ed at her own courage. ‘*t’s no
bus*ness of ****.’

The *ueen turned cr*mson w*th fury, and, after glar*ng at her for a
moment l*ke a w*ld beast, screamed ‘*ff w*th her head! *ff--’

‘*onsense!’ sa*d *l*ce, very loudly and dec*dedly, and the *ueen was
s*lent.

The *ing la*d h** hand upon her arm, and t*m*dly sa*d ‘***s*der, my
dear: she ** only a ch*ld!’

The *ueen turned angr*ly away from h*m, and sa*d to the *nave ‘Turn them
over!’

The *nave d*d so, very carefully, w*th one foot.

‘*et up!’ sa*d the *ueen, *n a shr*ll, loud vo*ce, and the three
gardeners *nstantly jumped up, and began bow*ng to the *ing, the *ueen,
the royal ch*ldren, and everybody else.

‘*eave off ****!’ screamed the *ueen. ‘*ou make me g*ddy.’ *nd then,
turn*ng to the rose-tree, she went on, ‘*hat **** you been do*ng here?’

‘*ay *t please your *ajesty,’ sa*d Two, *n a very humble tone, *****
down on one knee as he spoke, ‘we were try*ng--’

‘* see!’ sa*d the *ueen, who had meanwh*le been exam*n*ng the roses.
‘*ff w*th the*r heads!’ and the process*on moved on, three of the
sold*ers rema*n*ng beh*nd to execute the unfortunate gardeners, who ran
to *l*ce for protect*on.

‘*ou shan’t be beheaded!’ sa*d *l*ce, and she put them *nto a large
flower-pot **** stood near. The three sold*ers wandered about for a
m*nute or two, look*ng for them, and then qu*etly marched off after the
others.

‘*re the*r heads off?’ shouted the *ueen.

‘The*r heads are gone, *f *t please your *ajesty!’ the sold*ers shouted
*n reply.

‘That’s r*ght!’ shouted the *ueen. ‘*an you play croquet?’

The sold*ers were s*lent, and looked at *l*ce, as the quest*on was
ev*dently meant for her.

‘*es!’ shouted *l*ce.

‘*ome on, then!’ roared the *ueen, and *l*ce jo*ned the process*on,
wonder*ng very much what would happen next.

‘*t’s--*t’s a very f*ne day!’ sa*d a t*m*d vo*ce at her s*de. *he was
walk*ng by the *h*te *abb*t, who was peep*ng anx*ously *nto her face.

‘*ery,’ sa*d *l*ce: ‘--where’s the *uchess?’

‘*ush! *ush!’ sa*d the *abb*t *n a low, hurr*ed tone. *e looked
anx*ously over h** shoulder as he spoke, and then ra**ed h*mself upon
t*ptoe, put h** mouth close to her ear, and wh**pered ‘*he’s under
sentence of execut*on.’

‘*hat for?’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*id you say “*hat a p*ty!”?’ the *abb*t asked.

‘*o, * d*dn’t,’ sa*d *l*ce: ‘* don’t th*nk *t’s at all a p*ty. * sa*d
“*hat for?”’

‘*he boxed the *ueen’s ears--’ the *abb*t began. *l*ce gave a l*ttle
scream of laughter. ‘*h, hush!’ the *abb*t wh**pered *n a fr*ghtened
tone. ‘The *ueen w*ll hear you! *ou see, she came rather late, and the
*ueen sa*d--’

‘*et to your places!’ shouted the *ueen *n a vo*ce of thunder, and
people began runn*ng about *n all d*rect*ons, tumbl*ng up aga*nst each
other; however, they got settled down *n a m*nute or two, and the game
began. *l*ce thought she had never seen such a cur*ous croquet-ground *n
her l*fe; *t was all r*dges and furrows; the balls were l*ve hedgehogs,
the mallets l*ve flam*ngoes, and the sold*ers had to double themselves
up and to stand on the*r hands and feet, to make the arches.

The ch*ef d*ff*culty *l*ce found at f*rst was *n ***ag*ng her flam*ngo:
she succeeded *n gett*ng *ts body tucked away, comfortably enough, under
her arm, w*th *ts legs hang*ng down, but generally, just as she had got
*ts neck n*cely stra*ghtened out, and was ***** to g*ve the hedgehog a
blow w*th *ts head, *t ***** tw**t *tself round and look up *n her face,
w*th such a puzzled express*on **** she could not help burst*ng out
laugh*ng: and when she had got *ts head down, and was ***** to beg*n
aga*n, *t was very provok*ng to f*nd **** the hedgehog had unrolled
*tself, and was *n the act of crawl*ng away: bes*des all th**, there was
generally a r*dge or furrow *n the way wherever she wanted to send the
hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up sold*ers were always gett*ng up
and walk*ng off to other parts of the ground, *l*ce soon came to the
conclus*on **** *t was a very d*ff*cult game *ndeed.

The players all played at once w*thout wa*t*ng for turns, quarrell*ng
all the wh*le, and f*ght*ng for the hedgehogs; and *n a very short
t*me the *ueen was *n a fur*ous pass*on, and went stamp*ng about, and
shout*ng ‘*ff w*th h** head!’ or ‘*ff w*th her head!’ about once *n a
m*nute.

*l*ce began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet had any
d**pute w*th the *ueen, but she knew **** *t m*ght happen any m*nute,
‘and then,’ thought she, ‘what would become of me? They’re dreadfully
fond of behead*ng people here; the great wonder **, **** there’s any one
left al*ve!’

*he was look*ng about for some way of escape, and wonder*ng whether she
could get away w*thout be*ng seen, when she not*ced a cur*ous appearance
*n the a*r: *t puzzled her very much at f*rst, but, after watch*ng *t
a m*nute or two, she made *t out to be a gr*n, and she sa*d to herself
‘*t’s the *hesh*re *at: now * shall have somebody to talk to.’

‘*ow are you gett*ng on?’ sa*d the *at, as soon as there was mouth
enough for *t to speak w*th.

*l*ce wa*ted t*ll the eyes appeared, and then nodded. ‘*t’s no use
speak*ng to *t,’ she thought, ‘t*ll *ts ears have come, or at least one
of them.’ *n another m*nute the whole head appeared, and then *l*ce put
down her flam*ngo, and began an account of the game, feel*ng very glad
she had someone to l**ten to her. The *at seemed to th*nk **** there was
enough of *t now *n s*ght, and no more of *t appeared.

‘* don’t th*nk they play at all fa*rly,’ *l*ce began, *n rather a
compla*n*ng tone, ‘and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can’t hear
oneself speak--and they don’t seem to have any rules *n part*cular;
at least, *f there are, nobody attends to them--and you’ve no *dea how
confus*ng *t ** all the th*ngs be*ng al*ve; for *nstance, there’s the
arch *’ve got to go through next walk*ng about at the other end of the
ground--and * should have croqueted the *ueen’s hedgehog just now, only
*t ran away when *t saw m*ne com*ng!’

‘*ow do you l*ke the *ueen?’ sa*d the *at *n a low vo*ce.

‘*ot at all,’ sa*d *l*ce: ‘she’s so extremely--’ *ust then she not*ced
**** the *ueen was close beh*nd her, l**ten*ng: so she went on,
‘--l*kely to w*n, **** *t’s hardly worth wh*le f*n**h*ng the game.’

The *ueen sm*led and passed on.

‘*ho *** you talk*ng to?’ sa*d the *ing, ***** up to *l*ce, and look*ng
at the *at’s head w*th great cur*os*ty.

‘*t’s a fr*end of m*ne--a *hesh*re *at,’ sa*d *l*ce: ‘allow me to
*ntroduce *t.’

‘* don’t l*ke the look of *t at all,’ sa*d the *ing: ‘however, *t may
k**s my hand *f *t l*kes.’

‘*’d rather not,’ the *at remarked.

‘*on’t be *mpert*nent,’ sa*d the *ing, ‘and don’t look at me l*ke ****!’
*e got beh*nd *l*ce as he spoke.

‘* cat may look at a k*ng,’ sa*d *l*ce. ‘*’ve read **** *n some book,
but * don’t remember where.’

‘*ell, *t must be removed,’ sa*d the *ing very dec*dedly, and he called
the *ueen, who was pass*ng at the moment, ‘*y dear! * w**h you would
have th** cat removed!’

The *ueen had only one way of settl*ng all d*ff*cult*es, great or small.
‘*ff w*th h** head!’ she sa*d, w*thout even look*ng round.

‘*’ll fetch the execut*oner myself,’ sa*d the *ing eagerly, and he
hurr*ed off.

*l*ce thought she m*ght as well go back, and see how the game was *****
on, as she heard the *ueen’s vo*ce *n the d**tance, scream*ng w*th
pass*on. *he had already heard her sentence three of the players to be
executed for hav*ng m**sed the*r turns, and she d*d not l*ke the look
of th*ngs at all, as the game was *n such confus*on **** she never knew
whether *t was her turn or not. *o she went *n search of her hedgehog.

The hedgehog was engaged *n a f*ght w*th another hedgehog, wh*ch seemed
to *l*ce an excellent opportun*ty for croquet*ng one of them w*th the
other: the only d*ff*culty was, **** her flam*ngo was gone across to the
other s*de of the garden, where *l*ce could see *t try*ng *n a helpless
sort of way to fly up *nto a tree.

*y the t*me she had caught the flam*ngo and brought *t back, the f*ght
was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of s*ght: ‘but *t doesn’t
matter much,’ thought *l*ce, ‘as all the arches are gone from th** s*de
of the ground.’ *o she tucked *t away under her arm, **** *t m*ght not
escape aga*n, and went back for a l*ttle more conversat*on w*th her
fr*end.

*hen she got back to the *hesh*re *at, she was surpr**ed to f*nd qu*te a
large crowd collected round *t: there was a d**pute ***** on between
the execut*oner, the *ing, and the *ueen, who were all talk*ng at once,
wh*le all the rest were qu*te s*lent, and looked very uncomfortable.

The moment *l*ce appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle
the quest*on, and they repeated the*r arguments to her, though, as they
all spoke at once, she found *t very hard *ndeed to make out exactly
what they sa*d.

The execut*oner’s argument was, **** you couldn’t cut off a head unless
there was a body to cut *t off from: **** he had never had to do such a
th*ng before, and he wasn’t ***** to beg*n at *** t*me of l*fe.

The *ing’s argument was, **** anyth*ng **** had a head could be
beheaded, and **** you weren’t to talk nonsense.

The *ueen’s argument was, **** *f someth*ng wasn’t done about *t *n less
than no t*me she’d have everybody executed, all round. (*t was th** last
remark **** had made the whole party look so grave and anx*ous.)

*l*ce could th*nk of noth*ng else to say but ‘*t belongs to the *uchess:
you’d better ask *** about *t.’

‘*he’s *n pr**on,’ the *ueen sa*d to the execut*oner: ‘fetch her here.’
*nd the execut*oner went off l*ke an arrow.

 The *at’s head began fad*ng away the moment he was gone, and,
by the t*me he had come back w*th the *uchess, *t had ent*rely
d**appeared; so the *ing and the execut*oner ran w*ldly up and down
look*ng for *t, wh*le the rest of the party went back to the game.




******* *X. The *ock Turtle’s *tory

‘*ou can’t th*nk how glad * am to see you aga*n, you dear old th*ng!’
sa*d the *uchess, as she tucked her arm affect*onately *nto *l*ce’s, and
they walked off together.

*l*ce was very glad to f*nd her *n such a pleasant temper, and thought
to herself **** perhaps *t was only the pepper **** had made her so
savage when they met *n the k*tchen.

‘*hen *’* a *uchess,’ she sa*d to herself, (not *n a very hopeful tone
though), ‘* won’t have any pepper *n my k*tchen ** ***. *oup does very
well w*thout--*aybe *t’s always pepper **** makes people hot-tempered,’
she went on, very much pleased at hav*ng found out a new k*nd of
rule, ‘and v*negar **** makes them sour--and camom*le **** makes
them b*tter--and--and barley-sugar and such th*ngs **** make ch*ldren
sweet-tempered. * only w**h people knew ****: then they wouldn’t be so
st*ngy about *t, you know--’

*he had qu*te forgotten the *uchess by th** t*me, and was a l*ttle
startled when she heard her vo*ce close to her ear. ‘*ou’re th*nk*ng
about someth*ng, my dear, and **** makes you forget to talk. * can’t
tell you just now what the moral of **** **, but * shall remember *t *n
a b*t.’

‘*erhaps *t hasn’t one,’ *l*ce ventured to remark.

‘Tut, tut, ch*ld!’ sa*d the *uchess. ‘*veryth*ng’s got a moral, *f only
you can f*nd *t.’ *nd she squeezed herself up closer to *l*ce’s s*de as
she spoke.

*l*ce d*d not much l*ke keep*ng so close to her: f*rst, because the
*uchess was **** ugly; and secondly, because she was exactly the
r*ght he*ght to rest her ch*n upon *l*ce’s shoulder, and *t was an
uncomfortably sharp ch*n. *owever, she d*d not l*ke to be rude, so she
bore *t as well as she could.

‘The game’s ***** on rather better now,’ she sa*d, by way of keep*ng up
the conversat*on a l*ttle.

‘’T** so,’ sa*d the *uchess: ‘and the moral of **** **--“*h, ‘t** love,
‘t** love, **** makes the world go round!”’

‘*omebody sa*d,’ *l*ce wh**pered, ‘**** *t’s done by everybody m*nd*ng
the*r own bus*ness!’

‘*h, well! *t means much the same th*ng,’ sa*d the *uchess, d*gg*ng her
sharp l*ttle ch*n *nto *l*ce’s shoulder as she added, ‘and the moral
of **** **--“Take care of the sense, and the sounds w*ll take care of
themselves.”’

‘*ow fond she ** of f*nd*ng morals *n th*ngs!’ *l*ce thought to herself.

‘* dare say you’re wonder*ng why * don’t put my arm round your wa**t,’
the *uchess sa*d after a pause: ‘the reason **, **** *’m doubtful about
the temper of your flam*ngo. *hall * try the exper*ment?’

‘** m*ght b*te,’ *l*ce caut*ously repl*ed, not feel*ng at all anx*ous to
have the exper*ment tr*ed.

‘*ery true,’ sa*d the *uchess: ‘flam*ngoes and mustard both b*te. *nd
the moral of **** **--“*irds of a feather flock together.”’

‘*nly mustard **n’t a b*rd,’ *l*ce remarked.

‘*ight, as usual,’ sa*d the *uchess: ‘what a clear way you have of
putt*ng th*ngs!’

‘*t’s a m*neral, * *****,’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*f course *t **,’ sa*d the *uchess, who seemed ready to agree to
everyth*ng **** *l*ce sa*d; ‘there’s a large mustard-m*ne near here. *nd
the moral of **** **--“The more there ** of m*ne, the less there ** of
yours.”’

‘*h, * know!’ excla*med *l*ce, who had not attended to th** last remark,
‘*t’s a vegetable. *t doesn’t look l*ke one, but *t **.’

‘* qu*te agree w*th you,’ sa*d the *uchess; ‘and the moral of ****
**--“*e what you would seem to be”--or *f you’d l*ke *t put more
s*mply--“*ever *mag*ne yourself not to be otherw**e than what *t m*ght
appear to others **** what you were or m*ght have been was not otherw**e
than what you had been would have appeared to them to be otherw**e.”’

‘* th*nk * should understand **** better,’ *l*ce sa*d very pol*tely, ‘*f
* had *t wr*tten down: but * can’t qu*te follow *t as you say *t.’

‘That’s noth*ng to what * could say *f * chose,’ the *uchess repl*ed, *n
a pleased tone.

‘*ray don’t trouble yourself to say *t any longer than ****,’ sa*d
*l*ce.

‘*h, don’t talk about trouble!’ sa*d the *uchess. ‘* make you a present
of everyth*ng *’ve sa*d as yet.’

‘* cheap sort of present!’ thought *l*ce. ‘*’m glad they don’t g*ve
b*rthday presents l*ke ****!’ *ut she d*d not venture to say *t out
loud.

‘Th*nk*ng aga*n?’ the *uchess asked, w*th another d*g of her sharp
l*ttle ch*n.

‘*’ve a r*ght to th*nk,’ sa*d *l*ce sharply, for she was beg*nn*ng to
feel a l*ttle worr*ed.

‘*ust about as much r*ght,’ sa*d the *uchess, ‘as p*gs have to fly; and
the m--’

*ut here, to *l*ce’s great surpr**e, the *uchess’s vo*ce d*ed away, even
*n the m*ddle of her favour*te word ‘moral,’ and the arm **** was l*nked
*nto hers began to tremble. *l*ce looked up, and there stood the *ueen
*n front of them, w*th her arms folded, frown*ng l*ke a thunderstorm.

‘* f*ne day, your *ajesty!’ the *uchess began *n a low, weak vo*ce.

‘*ow, * g*ve you fa*r warn*ng,’ shouted the *ueen, stamp*ng on the
ground as she spoke; ‘e*ther you or your head must be off, and **** *n
about half no t*me! Take your cho*ce!’

The *uchess took her cho*ce, and was gone *n a moment.

‘*et’s go on w*th the game,’ the *ueen sa*d to *l*ce; and *l*ce was
too much fr*ghtened to say a word, but slowly followed her back to the
croquet-ground.

The other guests had taken advantage of the *ueen’s absence, and were
rest*ng *n the shade: however, the moment they saw her, they hurr*ed
back to the game, the *ueen merely remark*ng **** a moment’s delay would
cost them the*r l*ves.

*ll the t*me they were play*ng the *ueen never left off quarrell*ng w*th
the other players, and shout*ng ‘*ff w*th h** head!’ or ‘*ff w*th her
head!’ Those whom she sentenced were taken *nto custody by the sold*ers,
who of course had to leave off be*ng arches to do th**, so **** by
the end of half an hour or so there were no arches left, and all the
players, except the *ing, the *ueen, and *l*ce, were *n custody and
under sentence of execut*on.

Then the *ueen left off, qu*te out of breath, and sa*d to *l*ce, ‘*ave
you seen the *ock Turtle yet?’

‘*o,’ sa*d *l*ce. ‘* don’t even know what a *ock Turtle **.’

‘*t’s the th*ng *ock Turtle *oup ** made from,’ sa*d the *ueen.

‘* never saw one, or heard of one,’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*ome on, then,’ sa*d the *ueen, ‘and he shall tell you h** h**tory,’

*s they walked off together, *l*ce heard the *ing say *n a low vo*ce,
to the company generally, ‘*ou are all pardoned.’ ‘*ome, ****’* a good
th*ng!’ she sa*d to herself, for she had felt qu*te unhappy at the
number of execut*ons the *ueen had ordered.

They very soon came upon a *ryphon, ly*ng fast asleep *n the sun.
(** you don’t know what a *ryphon **, look at the p*cture.) ‘*p, lazy
th*ng!’ sa*d the *ueen, ‘and take th** young lady to see the *ock
Turtle, and to hear h** h**tory. * must go back and see after some
execut*ons * have ordered’; and she walked off, leav*ng *l*ce alone w*th
the *ryphon. *l*ce d*d not qu*te l*ke the look of the creature, but on
the whole she thought *t would be qu*te as safe to stay w*th *t as to go
after **** savage *ueen: so she wa*ted.

The *ryphon sat up and rubbed *ts eyes: then *t watched the *ueen t*ll
she was out of s*ght: then *t chuckled. ‘*hat fun!’ sa*d the *ryphon,
half to *tself, half to *l*ce.

‘*hat ** the fun?’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*hy, ***,’ sa*d the *ryphon. ‘*t’s all her fancy, ****: they never
executes nobody, you know. *ome on!’

‘*verybody says “come on!” here,’ thought *l*ce, as she went slowly
after *t: ‘* never was so ordered about *n all my l*fe, never!’

They had not gone far before they saw the *ock Turtle *n the d**tance,
s*tt*ng sad and lonely on a l*ttle ledge of rock, and, as they came
nearer, *l*ce could hear h*m s*gh*ng as *f h** heart would break. *he
p*t*ed h*m deeply. ‘*hat ** h** sorrow?’ she asked the *ryphon, and the
*ryphon answered, very nearly *n the same ***** as before, ‘*t’s all h**
fancy, ****: he hasn’t got no sorrow, you know. *ome on!’

*o they went up to the *ock Turtle, who looked at them w*th large eyes
full of tears, but sa*d noth*ng.

‘Th** here young lady,’ sa*d the *ryphon, ‘she wants for to know your
h**tory, she do.’

‘*’ll tell *t her,’ sa*d the *ock Turtle *n a deep, hollow tone: ‘s*t
down, both of you, and don’t speak a word t*ll *’ve f*n**hed.’

*o they sat down, and nobody spoke for some m*nutes. *l*ce thought to
herself, ‘* don’t see how he can **** f*n**h, *f he doesn’t beg*n.’ *ut
she wa*ted pat*ently.

‘*nce,’ sa*d the *ock Turtle at last, w*th a deep s*gh, ‘* was a real
Turtle.’

These ***** were followed by a very long s*lence, broken only by an
occas*onal exclamat*on of ‘*jckrrh!’ from the *ryphon, and the constant
heavy sobb*ng of the *ock Turtle. *l*ce was very nearly gett*ng up and
say*ng, ‘Thank you, s*r, for your *nterest*ng story,’ but she could
not help th*nk*ng there **** be more to come, so she sat st*ll and sa*d
noth*ng.

‘*hen we were l*ttle,’ the *ock Turtle went on at last, more calmly,
though st*ll sobb*ng a l*ttle now and then, ‘we went to school *n the
sea. The master was an old Turtle--we used to call h*m Torto**e--’

‘*hy d*d you call h*m Torto**e, *f he wasn’t one?’ *l*ce asked.

‘*e called h*m Torto**e because he taught us,’ sa*d the *ock Turtle
angr*ly: ‘really you are very dull!’

‘*ou ought to be ashamed of yourself for ask*ng such a s*mple quest*on,’
added the *ryphon; and then they both sat s*lent and looked at poor
*l*ce, who felt ready to s*nk *nto the earth. *t last the *ryphon sa*d
to the *ock Turtle, ‘*r*ve on, old fellow! *on’t be all day about *t!’
and he went on *n these *****:

‘*es, we went to school *n the sea, though you mayn’t bel*eve *t--’

‘* never sa*d * d*dn’t!’ *nterrupted *l*ce.

‘*ou d*d,’ sa*d the *ock Turtle.

‘*old your tongue!’ added the *ryphon, before *l*ce could speak aga*n.
The *ock Turtle went on.

‘*e had the best of educat*ons--*n fact, we went to school every day--’

‘*’*E been to a day-school, too,’ sa*d *l*ce; ‘you needn’t be so proud
as all ****.’

‘*ith extras?’ asked the *ock Turtle a l*ttle anx*ously.

‘*es,’ sa*d *l*ce, ‘we learned *rench and mus*c.’

‘*nd wash*ng?’ sa*d the *ock Turtle.

‘*erta*nly not!’ sa*d *l*ce *nd*gnantly.

‘*h! then yours wasn’t a really good school,’ sa*d the *ock Turtle *n
a tone of great rel*ef. ‘*ow at **** they had at the end of the b*ll,
“*rench, mus*c, *** *******--extra.”’

‘*ou couldn’t have wanted *t much,’ sa*d *l*ce; ‘l*v*ng at the bottom of
the sea.’

‘* couldn’t afford to learn *t.’ sa*d the *ock Turtle w*th a s*gh. ‘*
only took the regular course.’

‘*hat was ****?’ *nqu*red *l*ce.

‘*eel*ng and *r*th*ng, of course, to beg*n w*th,’ the *ock Turtle
repl*ed; ‘and then the d*fferent branches of *r*thmet*c--*mb*t*on,
*istract*on, *gl*f*cat*on, and *er**ion.’

‘* never heard of “*gl*f*cat*on,”’ *l*ce ventured to say. ‘*hat ** *t?’

The *ryphon l*fted up both *ts paws *n surpr**e. ‘*hat! *ever heard of
ugl*fy*ng!’ *t excla*med. ‘*ou know what to beaut*fy **, * suppose?’

‘*es,’ sa*d *l*ce doubtfully: ‘*t means--to--make--anyth*ng--prett*er.’

‘*ell, then,’ the *ryphon went on, ‘*f you don’t know what to ugl*fy **,
you *** a s*mpleton.’

*l*ce d*d not feel encouraged to ask any more quest*ons about *t, so she
turned to the *ock Turtle, and sa*d ‘*hat else had you to learn?’

‘*ell, there was *ystery,’ the *ock Turtle repl*ed, count*ng off
the subjects on h** flappers, ‘--*ystery, anc*ent and modern, w*th
*eaography: then *rawl*ng--the *rawl*ng-master was an old conger-eel,
**** used to come once a week: ** taught us *rawl*ng, *tretch*ng, and
*a*nt*ng *n *o*ls.’

‘*hat was **** l*ke?’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*ell, * can’t show *t you myself,’ the *ock Turtle sa*d: ‘*’m too
st*ff. *nd the *ryphon never learnt *t.’

‘*adn’t t*me,’ sa*d the *ryphon: ‘* went to the *lass*cs master, though.
*e was an old crab, ** was.’

‘* never went to h*m,’ the *ock Turtle sa*d w*th a s*gh: ‘he taught
*augh*ng and *r*ef, they used to say.’

‘*o he d*d, so he d*d,’ sa*d the *ryphon, s*gh*ng *n h** turn; and both
creatures h*d the*r faces *n the*r paws.

‘*nd how ***y hours a day d*d you do lessons?’ sa*d *l*ce, *n a hurry to
change the subject.

‘Ten hours the f*rst day,’ sa*d the *ock Turtle: ‘n*ne the next, and so
on.’

‘*hat a cur*ous plan!’ excla*med *l*ce.

‘That’s the reason they’re called lessons,’ the *ryphon remarked:
‘because they lessen from day to day.’

Th** was qu*te a new *dea to *l*ce, and she thought *t over a l*ttle
before she made her next remark. ‘Then the eleventh day must have been a
hol*day?’

‘*f course *t was,’ sa*d the *ock Turtle.

‘*nd how d*d you ***age on the twelfth?’ *l*ce went on eagerly.

‘That’s enough about lessons,’ the *ryphon *nterrupted *n a very dec*ded
tone: ‘tell her someth*ng about the games now.’




******* *. The *obster *uadr*lle

The *ock Turtle s*ghed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper across
h** eyes. *e looked at *l*ce, and tr*ed to speak, but for a m*nute or
two sobs choked h** vo*ce. ‘*ame as *f he had a bone *n h** throat,’
sa*d the *ryphon: and *t set to work shak*ng h*m and punch*ng h*m *n
the back. *t last the *ock Turtle recovered h** vo*ce, and, w*th tears
runn*ng down h** cheeks, he went on aga*n:--

‘*ou may not have l*ved much under the sea--’ [‘* haven’t,’ sa*d
*l*ce)--‘and perhaps you were never even *ntroduced to a lobster--’
(*l*ce began to say ‘* once tasted--’ but checked herself hast*ly, and
sa*d ‘*o, never’) ‘--so you can have no *dea what a del*ghtful th*ng a
*obster *uadr*lle **!’

‘*o, *ndeed,’ sa*d *l*ce. ‘*hat sort of a dance ** *t?’

‘*hy,’ sa*d the *ryphon, ‘you f*rst form *nto a l*ne along the
sea-shore--’

‘Two l*nes!’ cr*ed the *ock Turtle. ‘*eals, turtles, salmon, and so on;
then, when you’ve cleared all the jelly-f**h out of the way--’

‘**** generally takes some t*me,’ *nterrupted the *ryphon.

‘--you advance tw*ce--’

‘*ach w*th a lobster as a partner!’ cr*ed the *ryphon.

‘*f course,’ the *ock Turtle sa*d: ‘advance tw*ce, set to partners--’

‘--change lobsters, and ret*re *n same order,’ cont*nued the *ryphon.

‘Then, you know,’ the *ock Turtle went on, ‘you throw the--’

‘The lobsters!’ shouted the *ryphon, w*th a bound *nto the a*r.

‘--as far out to sea as you can--’

‘*w*m after them!’ screamed the *ryphon.

‘Turn a somersault *n the sea!’ cr*ed the *ock Turtle, caper*ng w*ldly
about.

‘*hange lobsters aga*n!’ yelled the *ryphon at the top of *ts vo*ce.

‘*ack to **** aga*n, and ****’s all the f*rst f*gure,’ sa*d the *ock
Turtle, suddenly dropp*ng h** vo*ce; and the two creatures, who had been
jump*ng about l*ke mad th*ngs all th** t*me, sat down aga*n very sadly
and qu*etly, and looked at *l*ce.

‘*t must be a very pretty dance,’ sa*d *l*ce t*m*dly.

‘*ould you l*ke to see a l*ttle of *t?’ sa*d the *ock Turtle.

‘*ery much *ndeed,’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*ome, let’s try the f*rst f*gure!’ sa*d the *ock Turtle to the *ryphon.
‘*e can do w*thout lobsters, you know. *h*ch shall s*ng?’

‘*h, *** s*ng,’ sa*d the *ryphon. ‘*’ve forgotten the *****.’

*o they began solemnly danc*ng round and round *l*ce, every now and
then tread*ng on her toes when they passed too close, and wav*ng the*r
forepaws to mark the t*me, wh*le the *ock Turtle sang th**, very slowly
and sadly:--

 ‘“*ill you walk a l*ttle faster?” sa*d a wh*t*ng to a sna*l.
 “There’s a porpo**e close beh*nd us, and he’s tread*ng on my ta*l.

 *ee how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!
 They are wa*t*ng on the sh*ngle--w*ll you come and jo*n the dance?

 *ill you, won’t you, w*ll you, won’t you, w*ll you jo*n the dance?
 *ill you, won’t you, w*ll you, won’t you, won’t you jo*n the dance?

 “*ou can really have no not*on how del*ghtful *t w*ll be
 *hen they take us up and throw us, w*th the lobsters, out to sea!”
  *ut the sna*l repl*ed “Too far, too far!” and gave a look askance--
 *a*d he thanked the wh*t*ng k*ndly, but he would not jo*n the dance.

 *ould not, could not, would not, could not, would not jo*n the dance.
 *ould not, could not, would not, could not, could not jo*n the dance.

 ‘“*hat matters *t how far we go?” h** scaly fr*end repl*ed.
 “There ** another shore, you know, upon the other s*de.
 The further off from *ng**** the nearer ** to *rance--
 Then turn not pale, beloved sna*l, but come and jo*n the dance.

 *ill you, won’t you, w*ll you, won’t you, w*ll you jo*n the dance?
 *ill you, won’t you, w*ll you, won’t you, won’t you jo*n the dance?”’

‘Thank you, *t’s a very *nterest*ng dance to watch,’ sa*d *l*ce, feel*ng
very glad **** *t was over at last: ‘and * do so l*ke **** cur*ous song
about the wh*t*ng!’

‘*h, as to the wh*t*ng,’ sa*d the *ock Turtle, ‘they--you’ve seen them,
of course?’

‘*es,’ sa*d *l*ce, ‘*’ve often seen them at d*nn--’ she checked herself
hast*ly.

‘* don’t know where *inn may be,’ sa*d the *ock Turtle, ‘but *f you’ve
seen them so often, of course you know what they’re l*ke.’

‘* bel*eve so,’ *l*ce repl*ed thoughtfully. ‘They have the*r ta*ls *n
the*r mouths--and they’re all over crumbs.’

‘*ou’re wrong about the crumbs,’ sa*d the *ock Turtle: ‘crumbs would all
wash off *n the sea. *ut they **** the*r ta*ls *n the*r mouths; and the
reason **--’ here the *ock Turtle yawned and shut h** eyes.--‘Tell her
about the reason and all ****,’ he sa*d to the *ryphon.

‘The reason **,’ sa*d the *ryphon, ‘**** they ***** go w*th the lobsters
to the dance. *o they got thrown out to sea. *o they had to fall a long
way. *o they got the*r ta*ls fast *n the*r mouths. *o they couldn’t get
them out aga*n. That’s all.’

‘Thank you,’ sa*d *l*ce, ‘*t’s very *nterest*ng. * never knew so much
about a wh*t*ng before.’

‘* can tell you more than ****, *f you l*ke,’ sa*d the *ryphon. ‘*o you
know why *t’s called a wh*t*ng?’

‘* never thought about *t,’ sa*d *l*ce. ‘*hy?’

‘** **** *** ***** *** ****S.’ the *ryphon repl*ed very solemnly.

*l*ce was thoroughly puzzled. ‘*oes the boots and shoes!’ she repeated
*n a wonder*ng tone.

‘*hy, what are **** shoes done w*th?’ sa*d the *ryphon. ‘* mean, what
makes them so sh*ny?’

*l*ce looked down at them, and cons*dered a l*ttle before she gave her
answer. ‘They’re done w*th black*ng, * bel*eve.’

‘*oots and shoes under the sea,’ the *ryphon went on *n a deep vo*ce,
‘are done w*th a wh*t*ng. *ow you know.’

‘*nd what are they made of?’ *l*ce asked *n a tone of great cur*os*ty.

‘*oles and eels, of course,’ the *ryphon repl*ed rather *mpat*ently:
‘any shr*mp could have told you ****.’

‘*f *’d been the wh*t*ng,’ sa*d *l*ce, whose thoughts were st*ll runn*ng
on the song, ‘*’d have sa*d to the porpo**e, “*eep back, please: we
don’t want *** w*th us!”’

‘They were obl*ged to have h*m w*th them,’ the *ock Turtle sa*d: ‘no
w**e f**h would go anywhere w*thout a porpo**e.’

‘*ouldn’t *t really?’ sa*d *l*ce *n a tone of great surpr**e.

‘*f course not,’ sa*d the *ock Turtle: ‘why, *f a f**h came to **, and
told me he was ***** a journey, * should say “*ith what porpo**e?”’

‘*on’t you mean “purpose”?’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘* mean what * say,’ the *ock Turtle repl*ed *n an offended tone. *nd
the *ryphon added ‘*ome, let’s hear some of **** adventures.’

‘* could tell you my adventures--beg*nn*ng from th** morn*ng,’ sa*d
*l*ce a l*ttle t*m*dly: ‘but *t’s no use ***** back to yesterday,
because * was a d*fferent person then.’

‘*xpla*n all ****,’ sa*d the *ock Turtle.

‘*o, no! The adventures f*rst,’ sa*d the *ryphon *n an *mpat*ent tone:
‘explanat*ons take such a dreadful t*me.’

*o *l*ce began tell*ng them her adventures from the t*me when she f*rst
saw the *h*te *abb*t. *he was a l*ttle nervous about *t just at f*rst,
the two creatures got so close to her, one on each s*de, and opened
the*r eyes and mouths so **** w*de, but she ga*ned courage as she went
on. *er l**teners were perfectly qu*et t*ll she got to the part about
her repeat*ng ‘*** *** ***, ****** ****I**,’ to the *aterp*llar, and the
***** all com*ng d*fferent, and then the *ock Turtle drew a long breath,
and sa*d ‘That’s very cur*ous.’

‘*t’s all about as cur*ous as *t can be,’ sa*d the *ryphon.

‘*t all came d*fferent!’ the *ock Turtle repeated thoughtfully. ‘*
should l*ke to hear her try and repeat someth*ng now. Tell her to
beg*n.’ *e looked at the *ryphon as *f he thought *t had some k*nd of
author*ty over *l*ce.

‘*tand up and repeat “‘T** *** ***** ** *** ********,”’ sa*d the
*ryphon.

‘*ow the creatures order one about, and make one repeat lessons!’
thought *l*ce; ‘* m*ght as well be at school at once.’ *owever, she
got up, and began to repeat *t, but her head was so full of the *obster
*uadr*lle, **** she hardly knew what she was say*ng, and the ***** came
very queer *ndeed:--

  ‘’T** the vo*ce of the *obster; * heard h*m declare,
  “*ou have baked me too brown, * must sugar my ha*r.”
   *s a duck w*th *ts eyel*ds, so he w*th h** nose
  Tr*ms h** belt and h** buttons, and turns out h** toes.’

       [later ed*t*ons cont*nued as follows
  *hen the sands are all dry, he ** gay as a lark,
  *nd w*ll talk *n contemptuous tones of the *hark,
  *ut, when the t*de r**es and sharks are around,
  *is vo*ce has a t*m*d and tremulous sound.]

‘That’s d*fferent from what * used to say when * was a ch*ld,’ sa*d the
*ryphon.

‘*ell, * never heard *t before,’ sa*d the *ock Turtle; ‘but *t sounds
uncommon nonsense.’

*l*ce sa*d noth*ng; she had sat down w*th her face *n her hands,
wonder*ng *f anyth*ng would **** happen *n a natural way aga*n.

‘* should l*ke to have *t expla*ned,’ sa*d the *ock Turtle.

‘*he can’t expla*n *t,’ sa*d the *ryphon hast*ly. ‘*o on w*th the next
verse.’

‘*ut about h** toes?’ the *ock Turtle pers**ted. ‘*ow ***** he turn them
out w*th h** nose, you know?’

‘*t’s the f*rst pos*t*on *n danc*ng.’ *l*ce sa*d; but was dreadfully
puzzled by the whole th*ng, and longed to change the subject.

‘*o on w*th the next verse,’ the *ryphon repeated *mpat*ently: ‘*t
beg*ns “* passed by h** garden.”’

*l*ce d*d not dare to d**obey, though she felt sure *t would all come
wrong, and she went on *n a trembl*ng vo*ce:--

  ‘* passed by h** garden, and marked, w*th one eye,
  *ow the *wl and the *anther were shar*ng a p*e--’

    [later ed*t*ons cont*nued as follows
  The *anther took p*e-crust, and gravy, and meat,
  *h*le the *wl had the d**h as *ts share of the treat.
  *hen the p*e was all f*n**hed, the *wl, as a boon,
  *as k*ndly perm*tted to pocket the spoon:
  *h*le the *anther rece*ved kn*fe and fork w*th a growl,
  *nd concluded the banquet--]

‘*hat ** the use of repeat*ng all **** stuff,’ the *ock Turtle
*nterrupted, ‘*f you don’t expla*n *t as you go on? *t’s by far the most
confus*ng th*ng * ever heard!’

‘*es, * th*nk you’d better leave off,’ sa*d the *ryphon: and *l*ce was
only too glad to do so.

‘*hall we try another f*gure of the *obster *uadr*lle?’ the *ryphon went
on. ‘*r would you l*ke the *ock Turtle to s*ng you a song?’

‘*h, a song, please, *f the *ock Turtle would be so k*nd,’ *l*ce
repl*ed, so eagerly **** the *ryphon sa*d, *n a rather offended tone,
‘*m! *o account*ng for tastes! *ing her “Turtle *oup,” w*ll you, old
fellow?’

The *ock Turtle s*ghed deeply, and began, *n a vo*ce somet*mes choked
w*th sobs, to s*ng th**:--

   ‘*eaut*ful *oup, so r*ch and green,
   *a*t*ng *n a hot tureen!
   *ho for such da*nt*es would not stoop?
   *oup of the even*ng, beaut*ful *oup!
   *oup of the even*ng, beaut*ful *oup!
     *eau--oot*ful *oo--oop!
     *eau--oot*ful *oo--oop!
   *oo--oop of the e--e--even*ng,
     *eaut*ful, beaut*ful *oup!

   ‘*eaut*ful *oup! *ho cares for f**h,
   *ame, or any other d**h?
   *ho would not g*ve all else for two
   *ennyworth only of beaut*ful *oup?
   *ennyworth only of beaut*ful *oup?
     *eau--oot*ful *oo--oop!
     *eau--oot*ful *oo--oop!
   *oo--oop of the e--e--even*ng,
     *eaut*ful, beaut*--**L ****!’

‘*horus aga*n!’ cr*ed the *ryphon, and the *ock Turtle had just begun
to repeat *t, when a cry of ‘The tr*al’s beg*nn*ng!’ was heard *n the
d**tance.

‘*ome on!’ cr*ed the *ryphon, and, tak*ng *l*ce by the hand, *t hurr*ed
off, w*thout wa*t*ng for the end of the song.

‘*hat tr*al ** *t?’ *l*ce panted as she ran; but the *ryphon only
answered ‘*ome on!’ and ran the faster, wh*le more and more fa*ntly
came, carr*ed on the breeze **** followed them, the melancholy *****:--

   ‘*oo--oop of the e--e--even*ng,
     *eaut*ful, beaut*ful *oup!’




******* *I. *ho *tole the Tarts?

The *ing and *ueen of *earts were seated on the*r throne when they
*******, w*th a great crowd assembled about them--all sorts of l*ttle
***** and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: the *nave was
stand*ng before them, *n cha*ns, w*th a sold*er on each s*de to guard
h*m; and near the *ing was the *h*te *abb*t, w*th a trumpet *n one hand,
and a scroll of parchment *n the other. *n the very m*ddle of the court
was a table, w*th a large d**h of tarts upon *t: they looked so good,
**** *t made *l*ce qu*te hungry to look at them--‘* w**h they’d get the
tr*al done,’ she thought, ‘and hand round the refreshments!’ *ut there
seemed to be no chance of th**, so she began look*ng at everyth*ng about
her, to pass away the t*me.

*l*ce had never been *n a court of just*ce before, but she had read
about them *n books, and she was qu*te pleased to f*nd **** she knew
the name of nearly everyth*ng there. ‘That’s the judge,’ she sa*d to
herself, ‘because of h** great w*g.’

The judge, by the way, was the *ing; and as he wore h** crown over the
w*g, (look at the front**p*ece *f you want to see how he d*d *t,) he d*d
not look at all comfortable, and *t was certa*nly not becom*ng.

‘*nd ****’s the jury-box,’ thought *l*ce, ‘and those twelve creatures,’
(she was obl*ged to say ‘creatures,’ you see, because some of them were
an*mals, and some were *****,) ‘* suppose they are the jurors.’ *he sa*d
th** last word two or three t*mes over to herself, be*ng rather proud of
*t: for she thought, and r*ghtly too, **** very few l*ttle g*rls of her
age knew the mean*ng of *t at all. *owever, ‘jury-men’ would have done
just as well.

The twelve jurors were all wr*t*ng very bus*ly on slates. ‘*hat are they
do*ng?’ *l*ce wh**pered to the *ryphon. ‘They can’t have anyth*ng to put
down yet, before the tr*al’s begun.’

‘They’re putt*ng down the*r names,’ the *ryphon wh**pered *n reply, ‘for
fear they should forget them before the end of the tr*al.’

‘*tup*d th*ngs!’ *l*ce began *n a loud, *nd*gnant vo*ce, but she stopped
hast*ly, for the *h*te *abb*t cr*ed out, ‘*ilence *n the court!’ and the
*ing put on h** spectacles and looked anx*ously round, to make out who
was talk*ng.

*l*ce could see, as well as *f she were look*ng over the*r shoulders,
**** all the jurors were wr*t*ng down ‘stup*d th*ngs!’ on the*r slates,
and she could even make out **** one of them d*dn’t know how to spell
‘stup*d,’ and **** he had to ask h** ne*ghbour to tell h*m. ‘* n*ce
muddle the*r slates’ll be *n before the tr*al’s over!’ thought *l*ce.

*ne of the jurors had a penc*l **** squeaked. Th** of course, *l*ce
could not stand, and she went round the court and got beh*nd h*m, and
very soon found an opportun*ty of tak*ng *t away. *he d*d *t so qu*ckly
**** the poor l*ttle juror (*t was *ill, the *izard) could not make out
at all what had become of *t; so, after hunt*ng all about for *t, he was
obl*ged to wr*te w*th one f*nger for the rest of the day; and th** was
of very l*ttle use, as *t left no mark on the slate.

‘*erald, read the accusat*on!’ sa*d the *ing.

*n th** the *h*te *abb*t blew three blasts on the trumpet, and then
unrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows:--

   ‘The *ueen of *earts, she made some tarts,
      *ll on a summer day:
    The *nave of *earts, he stole those tarts,
      *nd took them qu*te away!’

‘***s*der your verd*ct,’ the *ing sa*d to the jury.

‘*ot yet, not yet!’ the *abb*t hast*ly *nterrupted. ‘There’s a great
deal to come before ****!’

‘*all the f*rst w*tness,’ sa*d the *ing; and the *h*te *abb*t blew three
blasts on the trumpet, and called out, ‘*irst w*tness!’

The f*rst w*tness was the *atter. *e came *n w*th a teacup *n one
hand and a p*ece of bread-and-butter *n the other. ‘* beg pardon, your
*ajesty,’ he began, ‘for br*ng*ng these *n: but * hadn’t qu*te f*n**hed
my tea when * was sent for.’

‘*ou ought to have f*n**hed,’ sa*d the *ing. ‘*hen d*d you beg*n?’

The *atter looked at the *arch *are, who had followed h*m *nto the
court, arm-*n-arm w*th the *ormouse. ‘*ourteenth of *arch, * th*nk *t
was,’ he sa*d.

‘*ifteenth,’ sa*d the *arch *are.

‘*ixteenth,’ added the *ormouse.

‘*r*te **** down,’ the *ing sa*d to the jury, and the jury eagerly
wrote down all three dates on the*r slates, and then added them up, and
reduced the answer to sh*ll*ngs and pence.

‘Take off your hat,’ the *ing sa*d to the *atter.

‘*t **n’t m*ne,’ sa*d the *atter.

‘*tolen!’ the *ing excla*med, turn*ng to the jury, who *nstantly made a
memorandum of the fact.

‘* keep them to sell,’ the *atter added as an explanat*on; ‘*’ve none of
my own. *’m a hatter.’

*ere the *ueen put on her spectacles, and began star*ng at the *atter,
who turned pale and f*dgeted.

‘*ive your ev*dence,’ sa*d the *ing; ‘and don’t be nervous, or *’ll have
you executed on the spot.’

Th** d*d not seem to encourage the w*tness at all: he kept sh*ft*ng
from one foot to the other, look*ng uneas*ly at the *ueen, and *n
h** confus*on he b*t a large p*ece out of h** teacup *nstead of the
bread-and-butter.

*ust at th** moment *l*ce felt a very cur*ous sensat*on, wh*ch puzzled
her a good deal unt*l she made out what *t was: she was beg*nn*ng to
grow larger aga*n, and she thought at f*rst she would get up and leave
the court; but on second thoughts she dec*ded to rema*n where she was as
long as there was room for her.

‘* w**h you wouldn’t squeeze so.’ sa*d the *ormouse, who was s*tt*ng
next to her. ‘* can hardly breathe.’

‘* can’t help *t,’ sa*d *l*ce very meekly: ‘*’m grow*ng.’

‘*ou’ve no r*ght to grow here,’ sa*d the *ormouse.

‘*on’t talk nonsense,’ sa*d *l*ce more boldly: ‘you know you’re grow*ng
too.’

‘*es, but * grow at a reasonable pace,’ sa*d the *ormouse: ‘not *n ****
r*d*culous fash*on.’ *nd he got up very sulk*ly and crossed over to the
other s*de of the court.

*ll th** t*me the *ueen had never left off star*ng at the *atter, and,
just as the *ormouse crossed the court, she sa*d to one of the off*cers
of the court, ‘*r*ng me the l**t of the s*ngers *n the last concert!’ on
wh*ch the wretched *atter trembled so, **** he shook both h** shoes off.

‘*ive your ev*dence,’ the *ing repeated angr*ly, ‘or *’ll have you
executed, whether you’re nervous or not.’

‘*’m a poor ***, your *ajesty,’ the *atter began, *n a trembl*ng vo*ce,
‘--and * hadn’t begun my tea--not above a week or so--and what w*th the
bread-and-butter gett*ng so th*n--and the tw*nkl*ng of the tea--’

‘The tw*nkl*ng of the what?’ sa*d the *ing.

‘*t began w*th the tea,’ the *atter repl*ed.

‘*f course tw*nkl*ng beg*ns w*th a T!’ sa*d the *ing sharply. ‘*o you
take me for a dunce? *o on!’

‘*’m a poor ***,’ the *atter went on, ‘and most th*ngs tw*nkled after
****--only the *arch *are sa*d--’

‘* d*dn’t!’ the *arch *are *nterrupted *n a great hurry.

‘*ou d*d!’ sa*d the *atter.

‘* deny *t!’ sa*d the *arch *are.

‘*e den*es *t,’ sa*d the *ing: ‘leave out **** part.’

‘*ell, at any rate, the *ormouse sa*d--’ the *atter went on, look*ng
anx*ously round to see *f he would deny *t too: but the *ormouse den*ed
noth*ng, be*ng fast asleep.

‘*fter ****,’ cont*nued the *atter, ‘* cut some more bread-and-butter--’

‘*ut what d*d the *ormouse say?’ one of the jury asked.

‘That * can’t remember,’ sa*d the *atter.

‘*ou **** remember,’ remarked the *ing, ‘or *’ll have you executed.’

The m**erable *atter dropped h** teacup and bread-and-butter, and went
down on one knee. ‘*’m a poor ***, your *ajesty,’ he began.

‘*ou’re a very poor speaker,’ sa*d the *ing.

*ere one of the gu*nea-p*gs cheered, and was *mmed*ately suppressed by
the off*cers of the court. (*s **** ** rather a hard word, * w*ll just
expla*n to you how *t was done. They had a large canvas bag, wh*ch t*ed
up at the mouth w*th str*ngs: *nto th** they sl*pped the gu*nea-p*g,
head f*rst, and then sat upon *t.)

‘*’m glad *’ve seen **** done,’ thought *l*ce. ‘*’ve so often read
*n the newspapers, at the end of tr*als, “There was some attempts
at applause, wh*ch was *mmed*ately suppressed by the off*cers of the
court,” and * never understood what *t meant t*ll now.’

‘*f ****’s all you know about *t, you may stand down,’ cont*nued the
*ing.

‘* can’t go no lower,’ sa*d the *atter: ‘*’m on the floor, as *t **.’

‘Then you may *** down,’ the *ing repl*ed.

*ere the other gu*nea-p*g cheered, and was suppressed.

‘*ome, **** f*n**hed the gu*nea-p*gs!’ thought *l*ce. ‘*ow we shall get
on better.’

‘*’d rather f*n**h my tea,’ sa*d the *atter, w*th an anx*ous look at the
*ueen, who was read*ng the l**t of s*ngers.

‘*ou may go,’ sa*d the *ing, and the *atter hurr*edly left the court,
w*thout even wa*t*ng to put h** shoes on.

‘--and just take h** head off outs*de,’ the *ueen added to one of the
off*cers: but the *atter was out of s*ght before the off*cer could get
to the door.

‘*all the next w*tness!’ sa*d the *ing.

The next w*tness was the *uchess’s cook. *he carr*ed the pepper-box *n
her hand, and *l*ce guessed who *t was, even before she got *nto the
court, by the way the people near the door began sneez*ng all at once.

‘*ive your ev*dence,’ sa*d the *ing.

‘*han’t,’ sa*d the cook.

The *ing looked anx*ously at the *h*te *abb*t, who sa*d *n a low vo*ce,
‘*our *ajesty must cross-exam*ne **** w*tness.’

‘*ell, *f * must, * must,’ the *ing sa*d, w*th a melancholy a*r, and,
after fold*ng h** arms and frown*ng at the cook t*ll h** eyes were
nearly out of s*ght, he sa*d *n a deep vo*ce, ‘*hat are tarts made of?’

‘*epper, mostly,’ sa*d the cook.

‘Treacle,’ sa*d a sleepy vo*ce beh*nd her.

‘***lar **** *ormouse,’ the *ueen shr*eked out. ‘*ehead **** *ormouse!
Turn **** *ormouse out of court! *uppress h*m! *inch h*m! *ff w*th h**
wh**kers!’

*or some m*nutes the whole court was *n confus*on, gett*ng the *ormouse
turned out, and, by the t*me they had settled down aga*n, the cook had
d**appeared.

‘*ever m*nd!’ sa*d the *ing, w*th an a*r of great rel*ef. ‘*all the next
w*tness.’ *nd he added *n an undertone to the *ueen, ‘*eally, my dear,
*** must cross-exam*ne the next w*tness. *t qu*te makes my forehead
ache!’

*l*ce watched the *h*te *abb*t as he fumbled over the l**t, feel*ng very
cur*ous to see what the next w*tness would be l*ke, ‘--for they haven’t
got much ev*dence ***,’ she sa*d to herself. *mag*ne her surpr**e, when
the *h*te *abb*t read out, at the top of h** shr*ll l*ttle vo*ce, the
name ‘*l*ce!’




******* *I*. *l*ce’s *v*dence


‘*ere!’ cr*ed *l*ce, qu*te forgett*ng *n the flurry of the moment how
large she had grown *n the last few m*nutes, and she jumped up *n such
a hurry **** she t*pped over the jury-box w*th the edge of her sk*rt,
upsett*ng all the jurymen on to the heads of the crowd below, and there
they lay sprawl*ng about, rem*nd*ng her very much of a globe of goldf**h
she had acc*dentally upset the week before.

‘*h, * *** your pardon!’ she excla*med *n a tone of great d**may, and
began p*ck*ng them up aga*n as qu*ckly as she could, for the acc*dent of
the goldf**h kept runn*ng *n her head, and she had a vague sort of *dea
**** they must be collected at once and put back *nto the jury-box, or
they would d*e.

‘The tr*al cannot proceed,’ sa*d the *ing *n a very grave vo*ce, ‘unt*l
all the jurymen are back *n the*r proper places--***,’ he repeated w*th
great emphas**, look*ng hard at *l*ce as he sa*d do.

*l*ce looked at the jury-box, and saw ****, *n her haste, she had put
the *izard *n head downwards, and the poor l*ttle th*ng was wav*ng *ts
ta*l about *n a melancholy way, be*ng qu*te unable to move. *he soon got
*t out aga*n, and put *t r*ght; ‘not **** *t ****if*es much,’ she sa*d
to herself; ‘* should th*nk *t would be ***** as much use *n the tr*al
one way up as the other.’

*s soon as the jury had a l*ttle recovered from the shock of be*ng
upset, and the*r slates and penc*ls had been found and handed back to
them, they set to work very d*l*gently to wr*te out a h**tory of the
acc*dent, all except the *izard, who seemed too much overcome to do
anyth*ng but s*t w*th *ts mouth open, gaz*ng up *nto the roof of the
court.

‘*hat do you know about th** bus*ness?’ the *ing sa*d to *l*ce.

‘*oth*ng,’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*oth*ng ********?’ pers**ted the *ing.

‘*oth*ng whatever,’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘That’s very *mportant,’ the *ing sa*d, turn*ng to the jury. They were
just beg*nn*ng to wr*te th** down on the*r slates, when the *h*te *abb*t
*nterrupted: ‘*N*mportant, your *ajesty means, of course,’ he sa*d *n a
very respectful tone, but frown*ng and mak*ng faces at h*m as he spoke.

‘*N*mportant, of course, * meant,’ the *ing hast*ly sa*d, and went on
to h*mself *n an undertone,

‘*mportant--un*mportant--un*mportant--*mportant--’ as *f he were try*ng
wh*ch word sounded best.

*ome of the jury wrote *t down ‘*mportant,’ and some ‘un*mportant.’
*l*ce could see th**, as she was near enough to look over the*r slates;
‘but *t doesn’t matter a b*t,’ she thought to herself.

*t th** moment the *ing, who had been for some t*me bus*ly wr*t*ng *n
h** note-book, cackled out ‘*ilence!’ and read out from h** book, ‘*ule
*orty-two. *** ******S **** **** * **** **** ** ***** *** *****.’

*verybody looked at *l*ce.

‘*’* not a m*le h*gh,’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*ou are,’ sa*d the *ing.

‘*early two m*les h*gh,’ added the *ueen.

‘*ell, * shan’t go, at any rate,’ sa*d *l*ce: ‘bes*des, ****’s not a
regular rule: you *nvented *t just now.’

‘*t’s the oldest rule *n the book,’ sa*d the *ing.

‘Then *t ought to be *umber *ne,’ sa*d *l*ce.

The *ing turned pale, and shut h** note-book hast*ly. ‘***s*der your
verd*ct,’ he sa*d to the jury, *n a low, trembl*ng vo*ce.

‘There’s more ev*dence to come yet, please your *ajesty,’ sa*d the *h*te
*abb*t, jump*ng up *n a great hurry; ‘th** paper has just been p*cked
up.’

‘*hat’s *n *t?’ sa*d the *ueen.

‘* haven’t opened *t yet,’ sa*d the *h*te *abb*t, ‘but *t seems to be a
******, wr*tten by the pr**oner to--to somebody.’

‘*t must have been ****,’ sa*d the *ing, ‘unless *t was wr*tten to
nobody, wh*ch **n’t usual, you know.’

‘*ho ** *t d*rected to?’ sa*d one of the jurymen.

‘*t **n’t d*rected at all,’ sa*d the *h*te *abb*t; ‘*n fact, there’s
noth*ng wr*tten on the *******.’ *e unfolded the paper as he spoke, and
added ‘*t **n’t a ******, after all: *t’s a set of verses.’

‘*re they *n the pr**oner’s handwr*t*ng?’ asked another of the jurymen.

‘*o, they’re not,’ sa*d the *h*te *abb*t, ‘and ****’s the queerest th*ng
about *t.’ (The jury all looked puzzled.)

‘*e must have *m*tated somebody else’s hand,’ sa*d the *ing. (The jury
all br*ghtened up aga*n.)

‘*lease your *ajesty,’ sa*d the *nave, ‘* d*dn’t wr*te *t, and they
can’t prove * d*d: there’s no name ****ed at the end.’

‘*f you d*dn’t **** *t,’ sa*d the *ing, ‘**** only makes the matter
worse. *ou **** have meant some m**ch*ef, or else you’d have ****ed your
name l*ke an honest ***.’

There was a general clapp*ng of hands at th**: *t was the f*rst really
clever th*ng the *ing had sa*d **** day.

‘That *****S h** gu*lt,’ sa*d the *ueen.

‘*t proves noth*ng of the sort!’ sa*d *l*ce. ‘*hy, you don’t even know
what they’re about!’

‘*ead them,’ sa*d the *ing.

The *h*te *abb*t put on h** spectacles. ‘*here shall * beg*n, please
your *ajesty?’ he asked.

‘*eg*n at the beg*nn*ng,’ the *ing sa*d gravely, ‘and go on t*ll you
come to the end: then stop.’

These were the verses the *h*te *abb*t read:--

   ‘They told me you had been to her,
    *nd ment*oned me to h*m:
   *he gave me a good character,
    *ut sa*d * could not sw*m.

   *e sent them word * had not gone
    (*e know *t to be true):
   *f she should push the matter on,
    *hat would become of you?

   * gave her one, they gave h*m two,
    *ou gave us three or more;
   They all returned from h*m to you,
    Though they were m*ne before.

   *f * or she should chance to be
    *nvolved *n th** affa*r,
   *e trusts to you to set them free,
    *xactly as we were.

   *y not*on was **** you had been
    (*efore she had th** f*t)
   *n obstacle **** came between
    *im, and ourselves, and *t.

   *on’t let h*m know she l*ked them best,
    *or th** must ever be
   * secret, kept from all the rest,
    *etween yourself and me.’

‘That’s the most *mportant p*ece of ev*dence we’ve heard yet,’ sa*d the
*ing, rubb*ng h** hands; ‘so now let the jury--’

‘*f any one of them can expla*n *t,’ sa*d *l*ce, (she had grown so large
*n the last few m*nutes **** she wasn’t a b*t afra*d of *nterrupt*ng
h*m,) ‘*’ll g*ve h*m s*xpence. _*_ don’t bel*eve there’s an atom of
mean*ng *n *t.’

The jury all wrote down on the*r slates, ‘*** doesn’t bel*eve there’s an
atom of mean*ng *n *t,’ but none of them attempted to expla*n the paper.

‘*f there’s no mean*ng *n *t,’ sa*d the *ing, ‘**** saves a world of
trouble, you know, as we needn’t try to f*nd any. *nd yet * don’t know,’
he went on, spread*ng out the verses on h** knee, and look*ng at them
w*th one eye; ‘* seem to see some mean*ng *n them, after all. “--****
* ***** *** ****--” you can’t sw*m, can you?’ he added, turn*ng to the
*nave.

The *nave shook h** head sadly. ‘*o * look l*ke *t?’ he sa*d. (*h*ch he
certa*nly d*d ***, be*ng made ent*rely of cardboard.)

‘*ll r*ght, so far,’ sa*d the *ing, and he went on mutter*ng over
the verses to h*mself: ‘“** **** ** ** ** ****--” ****’s the jury, of
course--“* **** *** ***, **** **** *** ***--” why, **** must be what he
d*d w*th the tarts, you know--’

‘*ut, *t goes on “**** *** ******E* **** *** ** ***,”’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*hy, there they are!’ sa*d the *ing tr*umphantly, po*nt*ng to the tarts
on the table. ‘*oth*ng can be clearer than ****. Then aga*n--“****** ***
*** **** ***--” you never had f*ts, my dear, * th*nk?’ he sa*d to the
*ueen.

‘*ever!’ sa*d the *ueen fur*ously, throw*ng an *nkstand at the *izard
as she spoke. (The unfortunate l*ttle *ill had left off wr*t*ng on h**
slate w*th one f*nger, as he found *t made no mark; but he now hast*ly
began aga*n, us*ng the *nk, **** was tr*ckl*ng down h** face, as long as
*t lasted.)

‘Then the ***** don’t *** you,’ sa*d the *ing, look*ng round the court
w*th a sm*le. There was a dead s*lence.

‘*t’s a pun!’ the *ing added *n an offended tone, and everybody laughed,
‘*et the jury cons*der the*r verd*ct,’ the *ing sa*d, for about the
twent*eth t*me **** day.

‘*o, no!’ sa*d the *ueen. ‘*entence f*rst--verd*ct afterwards.’

‘*tuff and nonsense!’ sa*d *l*ce loudly. ‘The *dea of hav*ng the
sentence f*rst!’

‘*old your tongue!’ sa*d the *ueen, turn*ng purple.

‘* won’t!’ sa*d *l*ce.

‘*ff w*th her head!’ the *ueen shouted at the top of her vo*ce. *obody
moved.

‘*ho cares for you?’ sa*d *l*ce, (she had grown to her full s*ze by th**
t*me.) ‘*ou’re noth*ng but a pack of cards!’

*t th** the whole pack rose up *nto the a*r, and came fly*ng down upon
her: she gave a l*ttle scream, half of fr*ght and half of anger, and
tr*ed to beat them off, and found herself ly*ng on the bank, w*th her
head *n the lap of her s**ter, who was gently brush*ng away some dead
leaves **** had fluttered down from the trees upon her face.

‘*ake up, *l*ce dear!’ sa*d her s**ter; ‘*hy, what a long sleep you’ve
had!’

‘*h, *’ve had such a cur*ous dream!’ sa*d *l*ce, and she told her
s**ter, as well as she could remember them, all these strange *dventures
of hers **** you have just been read*ng about; and when she had
f*n**hed, her s**ter k**sed her, and sa*d, ‘*t *** a cur*ous dream,
dear, certa*nly: but now run *n to your tea; *t’s gett*ng late.’ *o
*l*ce got up and ran off, th*nk*ng wh*le she ran, as well she m*ght,
what a wonderful dream *t had been.

*ut her s**ter sat st*ll just as she left her, lean*ng her head on her
hand, watch*ng the sett*ng sun, and th*nk*ng of l*ttle *l*ce and all her
wonderful *dventures, t*ll she too began dream*ng after a fash*on, and
th** was her dream:--

*irst, she dreamed of l*ttle *l*ce herself, and once aga*n the t*ny
hands were clasped upon her knee, and the br*ght eager eyes were look*ng
up *nto hers--she could hear the very tones of her vo*ce, and see ****
queer l*ttle toss of her head to keep back the wander*ng ha*r ****
***** always get *nto her eyes--and st*ll as she l**tened, or seemed to
l**ten, the whole place around her became al*ve w*th the strange creatures
of her l*ttle s**ter’s dream.

The long grass rustled at her feet as the *h*te *abb*t hurr*ed by--the
fr*ghtened *ouse splashed h** way through the ne*ghbour*ng pool--she
could hear the rattle of the teacups as the *arch *are and h** fr*ends
shared the*r never-end*ng meal, and the shr*ll vo*ce of the *ueen
order*ng off her unfortunate guests to execut*on--once more the p*g-baby
was sneez*ng on the *uchess’s knee, wh*le plates and d**hes crashed
around *t--once more the shr*ek of the *ryphon, the squeak*ng of the
*izard’s slate-penc*l, and the chok*ng of the suppressed gu*nea-p*gs,
f*lled the a*r, m*xed up w*th the d**tant sobs of the m**erable *ock
Turtle.

*o she sat on, w*th closed eyes, and half bel*eved herself *n
*onder****, though she knew she had but to open them aga*n, and all
would change to dull real*ty--the grass would be only rustl*ng *n the
w*nd, and the pool r*ppl*ng to the wav*ng of the reeds--the rattl*ng
teacups would change to t*nkl*ng sheep-bells, and the *ueen’s shr*ll
cr*es to the vo*ce of the shepherd boy--and the sneeze of the baby, the
shr*ek of the *ryphon, and all the other queer no**es, would change (she
knew) to the confused clamour of the busy farm-yard--wh*le the low*ng
of the cattle *n the d**tance would take the place of the *ock Turtle’s
heavy sobs.

*astly, she p*ctured to herself how th** same l*ttle s**ter of hers
would, *n the after-t*me, be herself a grown wo***; and how she would
keep, through all her r*per years, the s*mple and lov*ng heart of her
ch*ldhood: and how she would gather about her other l*ttle ch*ldren, and
make ***** eyes br*ght and eager w*th ***y a strange tale, perhaps even
w*th the dream of *onder**** of long ago: and how she would feel w*th
all the*r s*mple sorrows, and f*nd a pleasure *n all the*r s*mple joys,
remember*ng her own ch*ld-l*fe, and the happy summer days.

              *** ***





*nd of *roject *utenberg’s *l*ce’s *dventures *n *onder****, by *ew** *arroll

*** *** ** **** ******* ***E*B*** *B*** **I*E’* *********S ** ********** ***

***** Th** f*le should be named 11-0.txt or 11-0.z*p *****
Th** and all assoc*ated f*les of var*ous formats w*ll be found *n:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/11/



*pdated ed*t*ons w*ll replace the prev*ous one--the old ed*t*ons
w*ll be renamed.

*reat*ng the works from publ*c doma*n pr*nt ed*t*ons means **** no
one owns a *n*ted *tates copyr*ght *n these works, so the **********
(and you!) can copy and d**tr*bute *t *n the *n*ted *tates w*thout
perm**s*on and w*thout pay*ng copyr*ght royalt*es.  *pec*al rules,
set forth *n the *eneral Terms of *se part of th** l*cense, apply to
copy*ng and d**tr*but*ng *roject *utenberg-tm electron*c works to
protect the ******* ***E*B***-tm concept and trademark.  *roject
*utenberg ** a reg**tered trademark, and may not be used *f you
charge for the e*ooks, unless you rece*ve spec*f*c perm**s*on.  *f you
do not charge anyth*ng for cop*es of th** e*ook, comply*ng w*th the
rules ** very easy.  *ou may use th** e*ook for nearly any purpose
such as creat*on of der*vat*ve works, reports, perfor***ces and
research.  They may be mod*f*ed and pr*nted and g*ven away--you may do
pract*cally ******** w*th publ*c doma*n e*ooks.  *ed**tr*but*on **
subject to the trademark l*cense, espec*ally commerc*al
red**tr*but*on.



*** *****: **** ******* ***

*** **** ******* ***E*B*** *******
****** **** **** ****** *** ********** ** *** **** ****

To protect the *roject *utenberg-tm m**s*on of promot*ng the free
d**tr*but*on of electron*c works, by us*ng or d**tr*but*ng th** work
(or any other work assoc*ated *n any way w*th the phrase “*roject
*utenberg”), you agree to comply w*th all the terms of the *ull *roject
*utenberg-tm *icense (ava*lable w*th th** f*le or onl*ne at
http://gutenberg.org/l*cense).


*ect*on 1.  *eneral Terms of *se and *ed**tr*but*ng *roject *utenberg-tm
electron*c works

1.*.  *y read*ng or us*ng any part of th** *roject *utenberg-tm
electron*c work, you *nd*cate **** you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of th** l*cense and *ntellectual property
(trademark/copyr*ght) agreement.  *f you do not agree to ab*de by all
the terms of th** agreement, you must cease us*ng and return or destroy
all cop*es of *roject *utenberg-tm electron*c works *n your possess*on.
*f you pa*d a fee for obta*n*ng a copy of or access to a *roject
*utenberg-tm electron*c work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of th** agreement, you may obta*n a refund from the person or
ent*ty to whom you pa*d the fee as set forth *n paragraph 1.*.8.

1.*.  “*roject *utenberg” ** a reg**tered trademark.  *t may only be
used on or assoc*ated *n any way w*th an electron*c work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of th** agreement.  There are a few
th*ngs **** you can do w*th most *roject *utenberg-tm electron*c works
even w*thout comply*ng w*th the full terms of th** agreement.  *ee
paragraph 1.* below.  There are a lot of th*ngs you can do w*th *roject
*utenberg-tm electron*c works *f you follow the terms of th** agreement
and help preserve free future access to *roject *utenberg-tm electron*c
works.  *ee paragraph 1.* below.

1.*.  The *roject *utenberg ***erary *rch*ve ********** (“the **********”
 or *G**F), owns a comp*lat*on copyr*ght *n the collect*on of *roject
*utenberg-tm electron*c works.  *early all the *nd*v*dual works *n the
collect*on are *n the publ*c doma*n *n the *n*ted *tates.  *f an
*nd*v*dual work ** *n the publ*c doma*n *n the *n*ted *tates and you are
located *n the *n*ted *tates, we do not cla*m a r*ght to prevent you from
copy*ng, d**tr*but*ng, perform*ng, d**play*ng or creat*ng der*vat*ve
works based on the work as long as all references to *roject *utenberg
are removed.  *f course, we hope **** you w*ll support the *roject
*utenberg-tm m**s*on of promot*ng free access to electron*c works by
freely shar*ng *roject *utenberg-tm works *n compl*ance w*th the terms of
th** agreement for keep*ng the *roject *utenberg-tm name assoc*ated w*th
the work.  *ou can eas*ly comply w*th the terms of th** agreement by
keep*ng th** work *n the same format w*th *ts attached full *roject
*utenberg-tm *icense when you share *t w*thout charge w*th others.

1.*.  The copyr*ght laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do w*th th** work.  *opyr*ght laws *n most countr*es are *n
a constant state of change.  *f you are outs*de the *n*ted *tates, check
the laws of your country *n add*t*on to the terms of th** agreement
before download*ng, copy*ng, d**play*ng, perform*ng, d**tr*but*ng or
creat*ng der*vat*ve works based on th** work or any other *roject
*utenberg-tm work.  The ********** makes no representat*ons concern*ng
the copyr*ght status of any work *n any country outs*de the *n*ted
*tates.

1.*.  *nless you have removed all references to *roject *utenberg:

1.*.1.  The follow*ng sentence, w*th act*ve l*nks to, or other *mmed*ate
access to, the full *roject *utenberg-tm *icense must appear prom*nently
whenever any copy of a *roject *utenberg-tm work (any work on wh*ch the
phrase “*roject *utenberg” appears, or w*th wh*ch the phrase “*roject
*utenberg” ** assoc*ated) ** accessed, d**played, performed, v*ewed,
cop*ed or d**tr*buted:

Th** e*ook ** for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and w*th
almost no restr*ct*ons whatsoever.  *ou may copy *t, g*ve *t away or
re-use *t under the terms of the *roject *utenberg *icense *ncluded
w*th th** e*ook or onl*ne at www.gutenberg.org

1.*.2.  *f an *nd*v*dual *roject *utenberg-tm electron*c work ** der*ved
from the publ*c doma*n (does not conta*n a not*ce *nd*cat*ng **** *t **
posted w*th perm**s*on of the copyr*ght holder), the work can be cop*ed
and d**tr*buted to anyone *n the *n*ted *tates w*thout pay*ng any fees
or charges.  *f you are red**tr*but*ng or prov*d*ng access to a work
w*th the phrase “*roject *utenberg” assoc*ated w*th or appear*ng on the
work, you must comply e*ther w*th the requ*rements of paragraphs 1.*.1
through 1.*.7 or obta*n perm**s*on for the use of the work and the
*roject *utenberg-tm trademark as set forth *n paragraphs 1.*.8 or
1.*.9.

1.*.3.  *f an *nd*v*dual *roject *utenberg-tm electron*c work ** posted
w*th the perm**s*on of the copyr*ght holder, your use and d**tr*but*on
must comply w*th both paragraphs 1.*.1 through 1.*.7 and any add*t*onal
terms *mposed by the copyr*ght holder.  *dd*t*onal terms w*ll be l*nked
to the *roject *utenberg-tm *icense for all works posted w*th the
perm**s*on of the copyr*ght holder found at the beg*nn*ng of th** work.

1.*.4.  *o not unl*nk or detach or remove the full *roject *utenberg-tm
*icense terms from th** work, or any f*les conta*n*ng a part of th**
work or any other work assoc*ated w*th *roject *utenberg-tm.

1.*.5.  *o not copy, d**play, perform, d**tr*bute or red**tr*bute th**
electron*c work, or any part of th** electron*c work, w*thout
prom*nently d**play*ng the sentence set forth *n paragraph 1.*.1 w*th
act*ve l*nks or *mmed*ate access to the full terms of the *roject
*utenberg-tm *icense.

1.*.6.  *ou may convert to and d**tr*bute th** work *n any b*nary,
compressed, marked up, nonpropr*etary or propr*etary form, *nclud*ng any
word process*ng or hypertext form.  *owever, *f you prov*de access to or
d**tr*bute cop*es of a *roject *utenberg-tm work *n a format other than
“*la*n *an*lla ****I” or other format used *n the off*c*al vers*on
posted on the off*c*al *roject *utenberg-tm web s*te (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no add*t*onal cost, fee or expense to the user, prov*de a
copy, a means of export*ng a copy, or a means of obta*n*ng a copy upon
request, of the work *n *ts or*g*nal “*la*n *an*lla ****I” or other
form.  *ny alternate format must *nclude the full *roject *utenberg-tm
*icense as spec*f*ed *n paragraph 1.*.1.

1.*.7.  *o not charge a fee for access to, v*ew*ng, d**play*ng,
perform*ng, copy*ng or d**tr*but*ng any *roject *utenberg-tm works
unless you comply w*th paragraph 1.*.8 or 1.*.9.

1.*.8.  *ou may charge a reasonable fee for cop*es of or prov*d*ng
access to or d**tr*but*ng *roject *utenberg-tm electron*c works prov*ded
****

- *ou pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross prof*ts you der*ve from
     the use of *roject *utenberg-tm works calculated us*ng the method
     you already use to calculate your appl*cable taxes.  The fee **
     owed to the owner of the *roject *utenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalt*es under th** paragraph to the
     *roject *utenberg ***erary *rch*ve **********.  *oyalty payments
     must be pa*d w*th*n 60 days follow*ng each date on wh*ch you
     prepare (or are legally requ*red to prepare) your per*od*c tax
     returns.  *oyalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the *roject *utenberg ***erary *rch*ve ********** at the
     address spec*f*ed *n *ect*on 4, “*nformat*on about donat*ons to
     the *roject *utenberg ***erary *rch*ve **********.”

- *ou prov*de a full refund of any money pa*d by a user who not*f*es
     you *n wr*t*ng (or by e-ma*l) w*th*n 30 days of rece*pt **** s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full *roject *utenberg-tm
     *icense.  *ou must requ*re such a user to return or
     destroy all cop*es of the works possessed *n a phys*cal med*um
     and d**cont*nue all use of and all access to other cop*es of
     *roject *utenberg-tm works.

- *ou prov*de, *n accordance w*th paragraph 1.*.3, a full refund of any
     money pa*d for a work or a replacement copy, *f a defect *n the
     electron*c work ** d**covered and reported to you w*th*n 90 days
     of rece*pt of the work.

- *ou comply w*th all other terms of th** agreement for free
     d**tr*but*on of *roject *utenberg-tm works.

1.*.9.  *f you w**h to charge a fee or d**tr*bute a *roject *utenberg-tm
electron*c work or group of works on d*fferent terms than are set
forth *n th** agreement, you must obta*n perm**s*on *n wr*t*ng from
both the *roject *utenberg ***erary *rch*ve ********** and *ichael
*art, the owner of the *roject *utenberg-tm trademark.  ***tact the
********** as set forth *n *ect*on 3 below.

1.*.

1.*.1.  *roject *utenberg volunteers and employees expend cons*derable
effort to *dent*fy, do copyr*ght research on, transcr*be and proofread
publ*c doma*n works *n creat*ng the *roject *utenberg-tm
collect*on.  *esp*te these efforts, *roject *utenberg-tm electron*c
works, and the med*um on wh*ch they may be stored, may conta*n
“*efects,” such as, but not l*m*ted to, *ncomplete, *naccurate or
corrupt data, transcr*pt*on errors, a copyr*ght or other *ntellectual
property *nfr*ngement, a defect*ve or damaged d**k or other med*um, a
computer v*rus, or computer codes **** damage or cannot be read by
your equ*pment.

1.*.2.  ******* ********, ********** ** ******S - *xcept for the “*ight
of *eplacement or *efund” descr*bed *n paragraph 1.*.3, the *roject
*utenberg ***erary *rch*ve **********, the owner of the *roject
*utenberg-tm trademark, and any other party d**tr*but*ng a *roject
*utenberg-tm electron*c work under th** agreement, d**cla*m all
l*ab*l*ty to you for damages, costs and expenses, *nclud*ng legal
fees.  *** ***** **** *** **** ** ****D*E* *** **********, ******
*********, ****** ** ******** ** ****** ** ******** ****** *****
******** ** ********* *3.  *** ***** **** *** **********, ***
*****M*** *****, *** *** *********** ***** **** ********* **** *** **
****** ** *** *** ******, ******, ********, *************, ******** **
********** ******S **** ** *** **** ****** ** *** *********** ** ****
******.

1.*.3.  ******* ***** ** *********** ** ****** - *f you d**cover a
defect *n th** electron*c work w*th*n 90 days of rece*v*ng *t, you can
rece*ve a refund of the money (*f any) you pa*d for *t by send*ng a
wr*tten explanat*on to the person you rece*ved the work from.  *f you
rece*ved the work on a phys*cal med*um, you must return the med*um w*th
your wr*tten explanat*on.  The person or ent*ty **** prov*ded you w*th
the defect*ve work may elect to prov*de a replacement copy *n l*eu of a
refund.  *f you rece*ved the work electron*cally, the person or ent*ty
prov*d*ng *t to you may choose to g*ve you a second opportun*ty to
rece*ve the work electron*cally *n l*eu of a refund.  *f the second copy
** also defect*ve, you may de***d a refund *n wr*t*ng w*thout further
opportun*t*es to f*x the problem.

1.*.4.  *xcept for the l*m*ted r*ght of replacement or refund set forth
*n paragraph 1.*.3, th** work ** prov*ded to you ‘**-**’ **** ** *****
*******I*S ** *** ****, ******* ** *******, ***L*D*** *** *** ******* **
*******I*S ** ********I*I***Y ** ******* *** *** *******.

1.*.5.  *ome states do not allow d**cla*mers of certa*n *mpl*ed
warrant*es or the exclus*on or l*m*tat*on of certa*n types of damages.
*f any d**cla*mer or l*m*tat*on set forth *n th** agreement v*olates the
law of the state appl*cable to th** agreement, the agreement shall be
*nterpreted to make the max*mum d**cla*mer or l*m*tat*on perm*tted by
the appl*cable state law.  The *nval*d*ty or unenforceab*l*ty of any
prov**ion of th** agreement shall not vo*d the rema*n*ng prov**ions.

1.*.6.  ********* - *ou agree to *ndemn*fy and hold the **********, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the **********, anyone
prov*d*ng cop*es of *roject *utenberg-tm electron*c works *n accordance
w*th th** agreement, and any volunteers assoc*ated w*th the product*on,
promot*on and d**tr*but*on of *roject *utenberg-tm electron*c works,
harmless from all l*ab*l*ty, costs and expenses, *nclud*ng legal fees,
**** ar**e d*rectly or *nd*rectly from any of the follow*ng wh*ch you do
or cause to occur: (a) d**tr*but*on of th** or any *roject *utenberg-tm
work, (b) alterat*on, mod*f*cat*on, or add*t*ons or delet*ons to any
*roject *utenberg-tm work, and (c) any *efect you cause.


*ect*on  2.  *nformat*on about the *iss*on of *roject *utenberg-tm

*roject *utenberg-tm ** synonymous w*th the free d**tr*but*on of
electron*c works *n formats readable by the w*dest var*ety of computers
*nclud*ng ********, old, m*ddle-aged and new computers.  *t ex**ts
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donat*ons from
people *n all walks of l*fe.

*olunteers and f*nanc*al support to prov*de volunteers w*th the
ass**tance they need, ** cr*t*cal to reach*ng *roject *utenberg-tm’s
goals and ensur*ng **** the *roject *utenberg-tm collect*on w*ll
rema*n freely ava*lable for generat*ons to come.  *n 2001, the *roject
*utenberg ***erary *rch*ve ********** was created to prov*de a secure
and per***ent future for *roject *utenberg-tm and future generat*ons.
To learn more about the *roject *utenberg ***erary *rch*ve **********
and how your efforts and donat*ons can help, see *ect*ons 3 and 4
and the ********** web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


*ect*on 3.  *nformat*on about the *roject *utenberg ***erary *rch*ve
**********

The *roject *utenberg ***erary *rch*ve ********** ** a non prof*t
501(c)(3) educat*onal corporat*on organ*zed under the laws of the
state of *iss**s*pp* and granted tax exempt status by the *nternal
*evenue *erv*ce.  The **********’s *I* or federal tax *dent*f*cat*on
number ** 64-6221541.  *ts 501(c)(3) ****** ** posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundra**ing.  ***tr*but*ons to the *roject *utenberg
***erary *rch*ve ********** are tax deduct*ble to the full extent
perm*tted by *.*. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The **********’s pr*nc*pal off*ce ** located at 4557 *elan *r. *.
*a*rbanks, *K, 99712., but *ts volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locat*ons.  *ts bus*ness off*ce ** located at
809 *orth 1500 *est, *alt *ake *ity, ** 84116, (801) 596-1887, ema*l
bus*ness@pglaf.org.  *ma*l contact l*nks and up to date contact
*nformat*on can be found at the **********’s web s*te and off*c*al
page at http://pglaf.org

*or add*t*onal contact *nformat*on:
     *r. *regory *. *ewby
     *h*ef *xecut*ve and *irector
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


*ect*on 4.  *nformat*on about *onat*ons to the *roject *utenberg
***erary *rch*ve **********

*roject *utenberg-tm depends upon and cannot surv*ve w*thout w*de
spread publ*c support and donat*ons to carry out *ts m**s*on of
*ncreas*ng the number of publ*c doma*n and l*censed works **** can be
freely d**tr*buted *n mach*ne readable form access*ble by the w*dest
array of equ*pment *nclud*ng outdated equ*pment.  *any small donat*ons
($1 to $5,000) are part*cularly *mportant to ma*nta*n*ng tax exempt
status w*th the *R*.

The ********** ** comm*tted to comply*ng w*th the laws regulat*ng
char*t*es and char*table donat*ons *n all 50 states of the *n*ted
*tates.  *ompl*ance requ*rements are not un*form and *t takes a
cons*derable effort, much paperwork and ***y fees to **** and keep up
w*th these requ*rements.  *e do not sol*c*t donat*ons *n locat*ons
where we have not rece*ved wr*tten conf*rmat*on of compl*ance.  To
**** ********S or determ*ne the status of compl*ance for any
part*cular state v**it http://pglaf.org

*h*le we cannot and do not sol*c*t contr*but*ons from states where we
have not met the sol*c*tat*on requ*rements, we know of no proh*b*t*on
aga*nst accept*ng unsol*c*ted donat*ons from donors *n such states who
approach us w*th offers to donate.

*nternat*onal donat*ons are gratefully ********, but we cannot make
any statements concern*ng tax treatment of donat*ons rece*ved from
outs*de the *n*ted *tates.  *.*. laws alone swamp our small staff.

*lease check the *roject *utenberg *eb pages for ******* donat*on
methods and addresses.  *onat*ons are ******** *n a number of other
ways *nclud*ng checks, onl*ne payments and cred*t card donat*ons.
To donate, please v**it: http://pglaf.org/donate


*ect*on 5.  *eneral *nformat*on *bout *roject *utenberg-tm electron*c
works.

*rofessor *ichael *. *art ** the or*g*nator of the *roject *utenberg-tm
concept of a l*brary of electron*c works **** could be freely shared
w*th anyone.  *or th*rty years, he produced and d**tr*buted *roject
*utenberg-tm e*ooks w*th only a loose network of volunteer support.


*roject *utenberg-tm e*ooks are often created from several pr*nted
ed*t*ons, all of wh*ch are conf*rmed as *ubl*c *oma*n *n the *.*.
unless a copyr*ght not*ce ** *ncluded.  Thus, we do not necessar*ly
keep e*ooks *n compl*ance w*th any part*cular paper ed*t*on.


*ost people start at our *eb s*te wh*ch has the ma*n *G search fac*l*ty:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

Th** *eb s*te *ncludes *nformat*on about *roject *utenberg-tm,
*nclud*ng how to make donat*ons to the *roject *utenberg ***erary
*rch*ve **********, how to help produce our new e*ooks, and how to
subscr*be to our ema*l news****** to hear about new e*ooks.
